This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
However little known the feelings or views of such a man may be on his
first entering a neighbourhood, this truth is so well fixed in the minds
of the surrounding families, that he is considered the rightful property
of some one or other of their daughters.
Netherfield Park is let at last?”
“Why, my dear, you must know, Mrs. Long says that Netherfield is taken
by a young man of large fortune from the north of England; that he came
down on Monday in a chaise and four to see the place, and was so much
be in the house by the end of next week.”
“How so? How can it affect them?”
must know that I am thinking of his marrying one of them.”
_may_ fall in love with one of them, and therefore you must visit him as
“I see no occasion for that. You and the girls may go, or you may send
them by themselves, which perhaps will be still better, for as you are
as handsome as any of them, Mr. Bingley may like you the best of the
the neighbourhood.”
be for one of them. Sir William and Lady Lucas are determined to
go, merely on that account, for in general, you know, they visit no
hearty consent to his marrying whichever he chooses of the girls; though
“I desire you will do no such thing. Lizzy is not a bit better than the
others; and I am sure she is not half so handsome as Jane, nor half so
good-humoured as Lydia. But you are always giving _her_ the preference.”
“They have none of them much to recommend them,” replied he; “they are
all silly and ignorant like other girls; but Lizzy has something more of
are my old friends. I have heard you mention them with consideration
these last twenty years at least.”
thousand a year come into the neighbourhood.”
visit them.”
“Depend upon it, my dear, that when there are twenty, I will visit them
reserve, and caprice, that the experience of three-and-twenty years had
Mr. Bennet was among the earliest of those who waited on Mr. Bingley. He
had always intended to visit him, though to the last always assuring
his wife that he should not go; and till the evening after the visit was
paid she had no knowledge of it. It was then disclosed in the following
“We are not in a way to know _what_ Mr. Bingley likes,” said her mother
“But you forget, mamma,” said Elizabeth, “that we shall meet him at the
compassion on my nerves. You tear them to pieces.”
“Kitty has no discretion in her coughs,” said her father; “she times
them ill.”
“Aye, so it is,” cried her mother, “and Mrs. Long does not come back
till the day before; so it will be impossible for her to introduce him,
“Then, my dear, you may have the advantage of your friend, and introduce
very little. One cannot know what a man really is by the end of a
Mrs. Long and her neices must stand their chance; and, therefore, as
she will think it an act of kindness, if you decline the office, I will
The girls stared at their father. Mrs. Bennet said only, “Nonsense,
“What can be the meaning of that emphatic exclamation?” cried he. “Do
you consider the forms of introduction, and the stress that is laid on
them, as nonsense? I cannot quite agree with you _there_. What say you,
on him. It is very unlucky; but as I have actually paid the visit, we
cannot escape the acquaintance now.”
The astonishment of the ladies was just what he wished; that of Mrs.
Bennet perhaps surpassing the rest; though, when the first tumult of joy
was over, she began to declare that it was what she had expected all the
as he spoke, he left the room, fatigued with the raptures of his wife.
“What an excellent father you have, girls!” said she, when the door was
or me, either, for that matter. At our time of life it is not so
the youngest, I dare say Mr. Bingley will dance with you at the next
“Oh!” said Lydia stoutly, “I am not afraid; for though I _am_ the
youngest, I'm the tallest.”
The rest of the evening was spent in conjecturing how soon he would
return Mr. Bennet's visit, and determining when they should ask him to
Not all that Mrs. Bennet, however, with the assistance of her five
daughters, could ask on the subject, was sufficient to draw from her
distant surmises; but he eluded the skill of them all, and they were at
last obliged to accept the second-hand intelligence of their neighbour,
agreeable, and, to crown the whole, he meant to be at the next assembly
“If I can but see one of my daughters happily settled at Netherfield,”
 said Mrs. Bennet to her husband, “and all the others equally well
admitted to a sight of the young ladies, of whose beauty he had
heard much; but he saw only the father. The ladies were somewhat more
fortunate, for they had the advantage of ascertaining from an upper
had Mrs. Bennet planned the courses that were to do credit to her
was obliged to be in town the following day, and, consequently, unable
to accept the honour of their invitation, etc. Mrs. Bennet was quite
he might be always flying about from one place to another, and never
settled at Netherfield as he ought to be. Lady Lucas quieted her fears
a little by starting the idea of his being gone to London only to get
a large party for the ball; and a report soon followed that Mr. Bingley
was to bring twelve ladies and seven gentlemen with him to the assembly.
The girls grieved over such a number of ladies, but were comforted the
day before the ball by hearing, that instead of twelve he brought only
the party entered the assembly room it consisted of only five
altogether--Mr. Bingley, his two sisters, the husband of the eldest, and
another young man.
with an air of decided fashion. His brother-in-law, Mr. Hurst, merely
looked the gentleman; but his friend Mr. Darcy soon drew the attention
of the room by his fine, tall person, handsome features, noble mien, and
the report which was in general circulation within five minutes
pronounced him to be a fine figure of a man, the ladies declared he
admiration for about half the evening, till his manners gave a disgust
which turned the tide of his popularity; for he was discovered to be
his large estate in Derbyshire could then save him from having a most
Mr. Bingley had soon made himself acquainted with all the principal
people in the room; he was lively and unreserved, danced every dance,
was angry that the ball closed so early, and talked of giving
one himself at Netherfield. Such amiable qualities must speak for
themselves. What a contrast between him and his friend! Mr. Darcy danced
introduced to any other lady, and spent the rest of the evening in
walking about the room, speaking occasionally to one of his own party.
His character was decided. He was the proudest, most disagreeable man
in the world, and everybody hoped that he would never come there again.
Amongst the most violent against him was Mrs. Bennet, whose dislike of
Elizabeth Bennet had been obliged, by the scarcity of gentlemen, to sit
Bingley, who came from the dance for a few minutes, to press his friend
it would be insupportable. Your sisters are engaged, and there is not
another woman in the room whom it would not be a punishment to me to
my life as I have this evening; and there are several of them you see
“_You_ are dancing with the only handsome girl in the room,” said Mr.
Darcy, looking at the eldest Miss Bennet.
“Oh! She is the most beautiful creature I ever beheld! But there is one
by other men. You had better return to your partner and enjoy her
remained with no very cordial feelings toward him. She told the story,
The evening altogether passed off pleasantly to the whole family. Mrs.
Bennet had seen her eldest daughter much admired by the Netherfield
her mother could be, though in a quieter way. Elizabeth felt Jane's
pleasure. Mary had heard herself mentioned to Miss Bingley as the most
accomplished girl in the neighbourhood; and Catherine and Lydia had been
fortunate enough never to be without partners, which was all that they
had yet learnt to care for at a ball. They returned, therefore, in good
spirits to Longbourn, the village where they lived, and of which they
were the principal inhabitants. They found Mr. Bennet still up. With
a book he was regardless of time; and on the present occasion he had a
good deal of curiosity as to the event of an evening which had raised
such splendid expectations. He had rather hoped that his wife's views on
the stranger would be disappointed; but he soon found out that he had a
“Oh! my dear Mr. Bennet,” as she entered the room, “we have had a most
delightful evening, a most excellent ball. I wish you had been there.
twice! and she was the only creature in the room that he asked a second
down the dance. So he inquired who she was, and got introduced, and
asked her for the two next. Then the two third he danced with Miss King,
and the two fourth with Maria Lucas, and the two fifth with Jane again,
and the two sixth with Lizzy, and the _Boulanger_--”
his partners. Oh that he had sprained his ankle in the first dance!”
anything more elegant than their dresses. I dare say the lace upon Mrs.
description of finery. She was therefore obliged to seek another branch
of the subject, and related, with much bitterness of spirit and some
exaggeration, the shocking rudeness of Mr. Darcy.
all worth pleasing. So high and so conceited that there was no enduring
him! He walked here, and he walked there, fancying himself so very
great! Not handsome enough to dance with! I wish you had been there, my
dear, to have given him one of your set-downs. I quite detest the man.”
When Jane and Elizabeth were alone, the former, who had been cautious in
likewise to be, if he possibly can. His character is thereby complete.”
seeing that you were about five times as pretty as every other woman
in the room. No thanks to his gallantry for that. Well, he certainly is
You never see a fault in anybody. All the world are good and agreeable
“I know you do; and it is _that_ which makes the wonder. With _your_
good sense, to be so honestly blind to the follies and nonsense of
others! Affectation of candour is common enough--one meets with it
everywhere. But to be candid without ostentation or design--to take the
of the bad--belongs to you alone. And so you like this man's sisters,
“Certainly not--at first. But they are very pleasing women when you
converse with them. Miss Bingley is to live with her brother, and keep
Elizabeth listened in silence, but was not convinced; their behaviour at
the assembly had not been calculated to please in general; and with more
was very little disposed to approve them. They were in fact very fine
ladies; not deficient in good humour when they were pleased, nor in the
power of making themselves agreeable when they chose it, but proud and
conceited. They were rather handsome, had been educated in one of the
pounds, were in the habit of spending more than they ought, and of
associating with people of rank, and were therefore in every respect
entitled to think well of themselves, and meanly of others. They were of
a respectable family in the north of England; a circumstance more deeply
impressed on their memories than that their brother's fortune and their
Mr. Bingley inherited property to the amount of nearly a hundred
thousand pounds from his father, who had intended to purchase an
good house and the liberty of a manor, it was doubtful to many of those
who best knew the easiness of his temper, whether he might not spend the
remainder of his days at Netherfield, and leave the next generation to
to look at Netherfield House. He did look at it, and into it for
half-an-hour--was pleased with the situation and the principal
rooms, satisfied with what the owner said in its praise, and took it
Between him and Darcy there was a very steady friendship, in spite of
great opposition of character. Bingley was endeared to Darcy by the
never appeared dissatisfied. On the strength of Darcy's regard, Bingley
had the firmest reliance, and of his judgement the highest opinion.
In understanding, Darcy was the superior. Bingley was by no means
deficient, but Darcy was clever. He was at the same time haughty,
inviting. In that respect his friend had greatly the advantage. Bingley
The manner in which they spoke of the Meryton assembly was sufficiently
to him; there had been no formality, no stiffness; he had soon felt
acquainted with all the room; and, as to Miss Bennet, he could not
conceive an angel more beautiful. Darcy, on the contrary, had seen a
collection of people in whom there was little beauty and no fashion, for
none of whom he had felt the smallest interest, and from none received
either attention or pleasure. Miss Bennet he acknowledged to be pretty,
Mrs. Hurst and her sister allowed it to be so--but still they admired
whom they would not object to know more of. Miss Bennet was therefore
established as a sweet girl, and their brother felt authorized by such
Within a short walk of Longbourn lived a family with whom the Bennets
in Meryton, where he had made a tolerable fortune, and risen to the
honour of knighthood by an address to the king during his mayoralty.
and, in quitting them both, he had removed with his family to a house
the world. For, though elated by his rank, it did not render him
supercilious; on the contrary, he was all attention to everybody. By
of them, a sensible, intelligent young woman, about twenty-seven, was
That the Miss Lucases and the Miss Bennets should meet to talk over
a ball was absolutely necessary; and the morning after the assembly
brought the former to Longbourn to hear and to communicate.
“_You_ began the evening well, Charlotte,” said Mrs. Bennet with civil
sure that _did_ seem as if he admired her--indeed I rather believe he
assemblies, and whether he did not think there were a great many
pretty women in the room, and _which_ he thought the prettiest? and his
answering immediately to the last question: 'Oh! the eldest Miss Bennet,
beyond a doubt; there cannot be two opinions on that point.'”
“_My_ overhearings were more to the purpose than _yours_, Eliza,” said
“Are you quite sure, ma'am?--is not there a little mistake?” said Jane.
“Aye--because she asked him at last how he liked Netherfield, and he
unless among his intimate acquaintances. With _them_ he is remarkably
the ball in a hack chaise.”
“Another time, Lizzy,” said her mother, “I would not dance with _him_,
often does, because there is an excuse for it. One cannot wonder that so
“Pride,” observed Mary, who piqued herself upon the solidity of her
nature is particularly prone to it, and that there are very few of us
who do not cherish a feeling of self-complacency on the score of some
quality or other, real or imaginary. Vanity and pride are different
things, though the words are often used synonymously. A person may
ourselves, vanity to what we would have others think of us.”
would, and the argument ended only with the visit.
The ladies of Longbourn soon waited on those of Netherfield. The visit
the goodwill of Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley; and though the mother was
found to be intolerable, and the younger sisters not worth speaking to,
a wish of being better acquainted with _them_ was expressed towards
the two eldest. By Jane, this attention was received with the greatest
pleasure, but Elizabeth still saw superciliousness in their treatment
of everybody, hardly excepting even her sister, and could not like them;
though their kindness to Jane, such as it was, had a value as arising in
all probability from the influence of their brother's admiration. It
was generally evident whenever they met, that he _did_ admire her and
to _her_ it was equally evident that Jane was yielding to the preference
which she had begun to entertain for him from the first, and was in a
was not likely to be discovered by the world in general, since Jane
uniform cheerfulness of manner which would guard her from the suspicions
of the impertinent. She mentioned this to her friend Miss Lucas.
on the public in such a case; but it is sometimes a disadvantage to be
so very guarded. If a woman conceals her affection with the same skill
from the object of it, she may lose the opportunity of fixing him; and
it will then be but poor consolation to believe the world equally in
the dark. There is so much of gratitude or vanity in almost every
_begin_ freely--a slight preference is natural enough; but there are
meet tolerably often, it is never for many hours together; and, as they
always see each other in large mixed parties, it is impossible that
every moment should be employed in conversing together. Jane should
therefore make the most of every half-hour in which she can command his
attention. When she is secure of him, there will be more leisure for
question but the desire of being well married, and if I were determined
these are not Jane's feelings; she is not acting by design. As yet,
she cannot even be certain of the degree of her own regard nor of its
only have discovered whether he had a good appetite; but you must
remember that four evenings have also been spent together--and four
“Yes; these four evenings have enabled them to ascertain that they
both like Vingt-un better than Commerce; but with respect to any other
the dispositions of the parties are ever so well known to each other or
ever so similar beforehand, it does not advance their felicity in the
have their share of vexation; and it is better to know as little as
possible of the defects of the person with whom you are to pass your
interest in the eyes of his friend. Mr. Darcy had at first scarcely
allowed her to be pretty; he had looked at her without admiration at the
ball; and when they next met, he looked at her only to criticise. But no
uncommonly intelligent by the beautiful expression of her dark eyes. To
this discovery succeeded some others equally mortifying. Though he had
of the fashionable world, he was caught by their easy playfulness. Of
this she was perfectly unaware; to her he was only the man who made
with her himself, attended to her conversation with others. His doing so
On his approaching them soon afterwards, though without seeming to have
to open the instrument, Eliza, and you know what follows.”
really rather not sit down before those who must be in the habit of
hearing the very best performers.” On Miss Lucas's persevering, however,
or two, and before she could reply to the entreaties of several that
she would sing again, she was eagerly succeeded at the instrument by her
sister Mary, who having, in consequence of being the only plain one in
the family, worked hard for knowledge and accomplishments, was always
Mary had neither genius nor taste; and though vanity had given her
much more pleasure, though not playing half so well; and Mary, at the
Scotch and Irish airs, at the request of her younger sisters, who,
with some of the Lucases, and two or three officers, joined eagerly in
dancing at one end of the room.
Mr. Darcy stood near them in silent indignation at such a mode of
passing the evening, to the exclusion of all conversation, and was too
is nothing like dancing after all. I consider it as one of the first
“Certainly, sir; and it has the advantage also of being in vogue amongst
the less polished societies of the world. Every savage can dance.”
continued after a pause, on seeing Bingley join the group; “and I doubt
not that you are an adept in the science yourself, Mr. Darcy.”
“Yes, indeed, and received no inconsiderable pleasure from the sight. Do
“Do you not think it would be a proper compliment to the place?”
of superior society; but I did not feel quite certain that the air of
to make any; and Elizabeth at that instant moving towards them, he was
struck with the action of doing a very gallant thing, and called out to
“Indeed, sir, I have not the least intention of dancing. I entreat you
Mr. Darcy, with grave propriety, requested to be allowed the honour of
“You excel so much in the dance, Miss Eliza, that it is cruel to deny
me the happiness of seeing you; and though this gentleman dislikes the
“He is, indeed; but, considering the inducement, my dear Miss Eliza,
injured her with the gentleman, and he was thinking of her with some
“I can guess the subject of your reverie.”
I was never more annoyed! The insipidity, and yet the noise--the
nothingness, and yet the self-importance of all those people! What would
I give to hear your strictures on them!”
agreeably engaged. I have been meditating on the very great pleasure
which a pair of fine eyes in the face of a pretty woman can bestow.”
would tell her what lady had the credit of inspiring such reflections.
“That is exactly the question which I expected you to ask. A lady's
“Nay, if you are serious about it, I shall consider the matter is
absolutely settled. You will be having a charming mother-in-law, indeed;
in default of heirs male, on a distant relation; and their mother's
the deficiency of his. Her father had been an attorney in Meryton, and
their father and succeeded him in the business, and a brother settled in
convenient distance for the young ladies, who were usually tempted
thither three or four times a week, to pay their duty to their aunt and
to a milliner's shop just over the way. The two youngest of the family,
Catherine and Lydia, were particularly frequent in these attentions;
their minds were more vacant than their sisters', and when nothing
better offered, a walk to Meryton was necessary to amuse their morning
hours and furnish conversation for the evening; and however bare of news
the country in general might be, they always contrived to learn some
from their aunt. At present, indeed, they were well supplied both with
news and happiness by the recent arrival of a militia regiment in the
neighbourhood; it was to remain the whole winter, and Meryton was the
Their visits to Mrs. Phillips were now productive of the most
interesting intelligence. Every day added something to their knowledge
of the officers' names and connections. Their lodgings were not long a
secret, and at length they began to know the officers themselves. Mr.
Phillips visited them all, and this opened to his nieces a store of
Mr. Bingley's large fortune, the mention of which gave animation
to their mother, was worthless in their eyes when opposed to the
After listening one morning to their effusions on this subject, Mr.
of the silliest girls in the country. I have suspected it some time, but
Catherine was disconcerted, and made no answer; but Lydia, with perfect
and her hope of seeing him in the course of the day, as he was going the
“Yes--but as it happens, they are all of them very clever.”
“This is the only point, I flatter myself, on which we do not agree. I
“My dear Mr. Bennet, you must not expect such girls to have the sense of
their father and mother. When they get to our age, I dare say they will
not think about officers any more than we do. I remember the time when
Colonel Forster looked very becoming the other night at Sir William's in
Carter do not go so often to Miss Watson's as they did when they first
came; she sees them now very often standing in Clarke's library.”
Mrs. Bennet was prevented replying by the entrance of the footman with
a note for Miss Bennet; it came from Netherfield, and the servant waited
“It is from Miss Bingley,” said Jane, and then read it aloud.
we shall be in danger of hating each other for the rest of our lives,
quarrel. Come as soon as you can on receipt of this. My brother and the
gentlemen are to dine with the officers.--Yours ever,
“With the officers!” cried Lydia. “I wonder my aunt did not tell us of
“Can I have the carriage?” said Jane.
rain; and then you must stay all night.”
they would not offer to send her home.”
“Oh! but the gentlemen will have Mr. Bingley's chaise to go to Meryton,
and the Hursts have no horses to theirs.”
“I had much rather go in the coach.”
“But, my dear, your father cannot spare the horses, I am sure. They are
wanted in the farm, Mr. Bennet, are they not?”
“They are wanted in the farm much oftener than I can get them.”
“But if you have got them to-day,” said Elizabeth, “my mother's purpose
She did at last extort from her father an acknowledgment that the horses
were engaged. Jane was therefore obliged to go on horseback, and her
mother attended her to the door with many cheerful prognostics of a
it rained hard. Her sisters were uneasy for her, but her mother was
delighted. The rain continued the whole evening without intermission;
once, as if the credit of making it rain were all her own. Till the
next morning, however, she was not aware of all the felicity of her
contrivance. Breakfast was scarcely over when a servant from Netherfield
brought the following note for Elizabeth:
Jones--therefore do not be alarmed if you should hear of his having been
to me--and, excepting a sore throat and headache, there is not much the
“Well, my dear,” said Mr. Bennet, when Elizabeth had read the note
colds. She will be taken good care of. As long as she stays there, it is
all very well. I would go and see her if I could have the carriage.”
the carriage was not to be had; and as she was no horsewoman, walking
“How can you be so silly,” cried her mother, “as to think of such a
there.”
“Is this a hint to me, Lizzy,” said her father, “to send for the
“No, indeed, I do not wish to avoid the walk. The distance is nothing
“I admire the activity of your benevolence,” observed Mary, “but every
“We will go as far as Meryton with you,” said Catherine and Lydia.
Elizabeth accepted their company, and the three young ladies set off
together.
“If we make haste,” said Lydia, as they walked along, “perhaps we may
In Meryton they parted; the two youngest repaired to the lodgings of one
of the officers' wives, and Elizabeth continued her walk alone, crossing
within view of the house, with weary ankles, dirty stockings, and a face
glowing with the warmth of exercise.
She was shown into the breakfast-parlour, where all but Jane were
That she should have walked three miles so early in the day, in such
dirty weather, and by herself, was almost incredible to Mrs. Hurst and
Miss Bingley; and Elizabeth was convinced that they held her in contempt
for it. She was received, however, very politely by them; and in their
brother's manners there was something better than politeness; there
Hurst nothing at all. The former was divided between admiration of the
to the occasion's justifying her coming so far alone. The latter was
immediately; and Jane, who had only been withheld by the fear of giving
however, to much conversation, and when Miss Bingley left them
together, could attempt little besides expressions of gratitude for the
When breakfast was over they were joined by the sisters; and Elizabeth
began to like them herself, when she saw how much affection and
solicitude they showed for Jane. The apothecary came, and having
a violent cold, and that they must endeavour to get the better of it;
was followed readily, for the feverish symptoms increased, and her head
the other ladies often absent; the gentlemen being out, they had, in
When the clock struck three, Elizabeth felt that she must go, and very
unwillingly said so. Miss Bingley offered her the carriage, and she only
in parting with her, that Miss Bingley was obliged to convert the offer
of the chaise to an invitation to remain at Netherfield for the present.
Longbourn to acquaint the family with her stay and bring back a supply
of clothes.
At five o'clock the two ladies retired to dress, and at half-past six
Elizabeth was summoned to dinner. To the civil inquiries which then
poured in, and amongst which she had the pleasure of distinguishing the
this, repeated three or four times how much they were grieved, how
shocking it was to have a bad cold, and how excessively they disliked
being ill themselves; and then thought no more of the matter: and their
indifference towards Jane when not immediately before them restored
Elizabeth to the enjoyment of all her former dislike.
Their brother, indeed, was the only one of the party whom she could
attentions to herself most pleasing, and they prevented her feeling
herself so much an intruder as she believed she was considered by the
others. She had very little notice from any but him. Miss Bingley was
began abusing her as soon as she was out of the room. Her manners were
she had no conversation, no style, no beauty. Mrs. Hurst thought the
nonsensical to come at all! Why must _she_ be scampering about the
in mud, I am absolutely certain; and the gown which had been let down to
well when she came into the room this morning. Her dirty petticoat quite
this adventure has rather affected your admiration of her fine eyes.”
“Not at all,” he replied; “they were brightened by the exercise.” A
such a father and mother, and such low connections, I am afraid there is
“I think I have heard you say that their uncle is an attorney in
“Yes; and they have another, who lives somewhere near Cheapside.”
“That is capital,” added her sister, and they both laughed heartily.
“If they had uncles enough to fill _all_ Cheapside,” cried Bingley, “it
would not make them one jot less agreeable.”
“But it must very materially lessen their chance of marrying men of any
consideration in the world,” replied Darcy.
To this speech Bingley made no answer; but his sisters gave it their
hearty assent, and indulged their mirth for some time at the expense of
their dear friend's vulgar relations.
With a renewal of tenderness, however, they returned to her room on
leaving the dining-parlour, and sat with her till summoned to coffee.
late in the evening, when she had the comfort of seeing her sleep, and
when it seemed to her rather right than pleasant that she should go
downstairs herself. On entering the drawing-room she found the whole
party at loo, and was immediately invited to join them; but suspecting
them to be playing high she declined it, and making her sister the
excuse, said she would amuse herself for the short time she could stay
“Do you prefer reading to cards?” said he; “that is rather singular.”
“I deserve neither such praise nor such censure,” cried Elizabeth; “I am
Elizabeth thanked him from her heart, and then walked towards the
others--all that his library afforded.
in the room.
“I am astonished,” said Miss Bingley, “that my father should have left
“It ought to be good,” he replied, “it has been the work of many
“And then you have added so much to it yourself, you are always buying
“I cannot comprehend the neglect of a family library in such days as
these.”
“Neglect! I am sure you neglect nothing that can add to the beauties of
near the card-table, and stationed herself between Mr. Bingley and his
eldest sister, to observe the game.
“Is Miss Darcy much grown since the spring?” said Miss Bingley; “will
rather taller.”
for her age! Her performance on the pianoforte is exquisite.”
to be so very accomplished as they all are.”
“Yes, all of them, I think. They all paint tables, cover screens, and
I never heard a young lady spoken of for the first time, without being
“Your list of the common extent of accomplishments,” said Darcy, “has
otherwise than by netting a purse or covering a screen. But I am very
cannot boast of knowing more than half-a-dozen, in the whole range of my
dancing, and the modern languages, to deserve the word; and besides
walking, the tone of her voice, her address and expressions, or the word
yet add something more substantial, in the improvement of her mind by
I rather wonder now at your knowing _any_.”
“Are you so severe upon your own sex as to doubt the possibility of all
Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley both cried out against the injustice of her
implied doubt, and were both protesting that they knew many women who
answered this description, when Mr. Hurst called them to order, with
bitter complaints of their inattention to what was going forward. As all
conversation was thereby at an end, Elizabeth soon afterwards left the
“Elizabeth Bennet,” said Miss Bingley, when the door was closed on her,
“is one of those young ladies who seek to recommend themselves to the
other sex by undervaluing their own; and with many men, I dare say, it
“there is a meanness in _all_ the arts which ladies sometimes condescend
continue the subject.
Elizabeth joined them again only to say that her sister was worse, and
be of any service, recommended an express to town for one of the most
unwilling to comply with their brother's proposal; and it was settled
that Mr. Jones should be sent for early in the morning, if Miss Bennet
declared that they were miserable. They solaced their wretchedness,
attention might be paid to the sick lady and her sister.
Elizabeth passed the chief of the night in her sister's room, and in the
morning had the pleasure of being able to send a tolerable answer to the
and some time afterwards from the two elegant ladies who waited on his
note sent to Longbourn, desiring her mother to visit Jane, and form her
two youngest girls, reached Netherfield soon after the family breakfast.
restoration to health would probably remove her from Netherfield. She
would not listen, therefore, to her daughter's proposal of being carried
home; neither did the apothecary, who arrived about the same time, think
Bingley's appearance and invitation, the mother and three daughters all
attended her into the breakfast parlour. Bingley met them with hopes
a vast deal, though with the greatest patience in the world, which is
always the way with her, for she has, without exception, the sweetest
temper I have ever met with. I often tell my other girls they are
charming prospect over the gravel walk. I do not know a place in the
country that is equal to Netherfield. You will not think of quitting it
“Whatever I do is done in a hurry,” replied he; “and therefore if I
should resolve to quit Netherfield, I should probably be off in five
“Lizzy,” cried her mother, “remember where you are, and do not run on in
the wild manner that you are suffered to do at home.”
“Yes, but intricate characters are the _most_ amusing. They have at
“But people themselves alter so much, that there is something new to be
observed in them for ever.”
a country neighbourhood. “I assure you there is quite as much of _that_
going on in the country as in town.”
“I cannot see that London has any great advantage over the country, for
my part, except the shops and public places. The country is a vast deal
“When I am in the country,” he replied, “I never wish to leave it;
and when I am in town it is pretty much the same. They have each their
advantages, and I can be equally happy in either.”
“Aye--that is because you have the right disposition. But that
gentleman,” looking at Darcy, “seemed to think the country was nothing
mother. “You quite mistook Mr. Darcy. He only meant that there was not
such a variety of people to be met with in the country as in the town,
“Certainly, my dear, nobody said there were; but as to not meeting
with many people in this neighbourhood, I believe there are few
Mr. Darcy with a very expressive smile. Elizabeth, for the sake of
saying something that might turn her mother's thoughts, now asked her if
“Yes, she called yesterday with her father. What an agreeable man Sir
William is, Mr. Bingley, is not he? So much the man of fashion! So
is my idea of good breeding; and those persons who fancy themselves very
important, and never open their mouths, quite mistake the matter.”
“No, she would go home. I fancy she was wanted about the mince-pies. For
my part, Mr. Bingley, I always keep servants that can do their own work;
judge for themselves, and the Lucases are a very good sort of girls,
I assure you. It is a pity they are not handsome! Not that I think
Charlotte so _very_ plain--but then she is our particular friend.”
partiality. When she was only fifteen, there was a man at my brother
on her, and very pretty they were.”
been many a one, I fancy, overcome in the same way. I wonder who first
discovered the efficacy of poetry in driving away love!”
“I have been used to consider poetry as the _food_ of love,” said Darcy.
Darcy only smiled; and the general pause which ensued made Elizabeth
tremble lest her mother should be exposing herself again. She longed to
civil also, and say what the occasion required. She performed her part
soon afterwards ordered her carriage. Upon this signal, the youngest of
each other during the whole visit, and the result of it was, that the
into the country to give a ball at Netherfield.
and good-humoured countenance; a favourite with her mother, whose
animal spirits, and a sort of natural self-consequence, which the
attention of the officers, to whom her uncle's good dinners, and her own
equal, therefore, to address Mr. Bingley on the subject of the ball, and
abruptly reminded him of his promise; adding, that it would be the most
shameful thing in the world if he did not keep it. His answer to this
sudden attack was delightful to their mother's ear:
your sister is recovered, you shall, if you please, name the very day of
the ball. But you would not wish to be dancing when she is ill.”
added, “I shall insist on their giving one also. I shall tell Colonel
Mrs. Bennet and her daughters then departed, and Elizabeth returned
instantly to Jane, leaving her own and her relations' behaviour to the
remarks of the two ladies and Mr. Darcy; the latter of whom, however,
could not be prevailed on to join in their censure of _her_, in spite of
The day passed much as the day before had done. Mrs. Hurst and Miss
Bingley had spent some hours of the morning with the invalid, who
continued, though slowly, to mend; and in the evening Elizabeth joined
their party in the drawing-room. The loo-table, however, did not appear.
the progress of his letter and repeatedly calling off his attention by
Mrs. Hurst was observing their game.
commendations of the lady, either on his handwriting, or on the evenness
of his lines, or on the length of his letter, with the perfect unconcern
“You are mistaken. I write rather slowly.”
“How many letters you must have occasion to write in the course of a
year! Letters of business, too! How odious I should think them!”
“It is fortunate, then, that they fall to my lot instead of yours.”
“Tell your sister I am delighted to hear of her improvement on the harp;
present I have not room to do them justice.”
“They are generally long; but whether always charming it is not for me
brother, “because he does _not_ write with ease. He studies too much for
“Oh!” cried Miss Bingley, “Charles writes in the most careless way
imaginable. He leaves out half his words, and blots the rest.”
“My ideas flow so rapidly that I have not time to express them--by which
“Nothing is more deceitful,” said Darcy, “than the appearance of
“And which of the two do you call _my_ little recent piece of modesty?”
writing, because you consider them as proceeding from a rapidity of
quickness is always prized much by the possessor, and often without any
attention to the imperfection of the performance. When you told Mrs.
Bennet this morning that if you ever resolved upon quitting Netherfield
panegyric, of compliment to yourself--and yet what is there so very
“Nay,” cried Bingley, “this is too much, to remember at night all the
foolish things that were said in the morning. And yet, upon my honour,
moment. At least, therefore, I did not assume the character of needless
precipitance merely to show off before the ladies.”
go--and at another word, might stay a month.”
friend says into a compliment on the sweetness of my temper. But I am
“Would Mr. Darcy then consider the rashness of your original intentions
“Upon my word, I cannot exactly explain the matter; Darcy must speak for
but which I have never acknowledged. Allowing the case, however, to
that the friend who is supposed to desire his return to the house, and
the delay of his plan, has merely desired it, asked it without offering
“To yield readily--easily--to the _persuasion_ of a friend is no merit
“To yield without conviction is no compliment to the understanding of
either.”
“You appear to me, Mr. Darcy, to allow nothing for the influence of
friendship and affection. A regard for the requester would often make
supposed about Mr. Bingley. We may as well wait, perhaps, till the
circumstance occurs before we discuss the discretion of his behaviour
thereupon. But in general and ordinary cases between friend and friend,
where one of them is desired by the other to change a resolution of no
with the desire, without waiting to be argued into it?”
arrange with rather more precision the degree of importance which is to
appertain to this request, as well as the degree of intimacy subsisting
between the parties?”
“By all means,” cried Bingley; “let us hear all the particulars, not
forgetting their comparative height and size; for that will have more
weight in the argument, Miss Bennet, than you may be aware of. I assure
rather offended, and therefore checked her laugh. Miss Bingley warmly
resented the indignity he had received, in an expostulation with her
brother for talking such nonsense.
Bennet will defer yours till I am out of the room, I shall be very
thankful; and then you may say whatever you like of me.”
to the pianoforte; and, after a polite request that Elizabeth would lead
the way which the other as politely and more earnestly negatived, she
Mrs. Hurst sang with her sister, and while they were thus employed,
that lay on the instrument, how frequently Mr. Darcy's eyes were fixed
however, at last that she drew his notice because there was something
any other person present. The supposition did not pain her. She liked
After playing some Italian songs, Miss Bingley varied the charm by
She smiled, but made no answer. He repeated the question, with some
that you might have the pleasure of despising my taste; but I always
their premeditated contempt. I have, therefore, made up my mind to tell
Elizabeth, having rather expected to affront him, was amazed at his
gallantry; but there was a mixture of sweetness and archness in her
believed, that were it not for the inferiority of her connections, he
anxiety for the recovery of her dear friend Jane received some
their supposed marriage, and planning his happiness in such an alliance.
“I hope,” said she, as they were walking together in the shrubbery
the next day, “you will give your mother-in-law a few hints, when this
desirable event takes place, as to the advantage of holding her tongue;
and if you can compass it, do cure the younger girls of running after
“Oh! yes. Do let the portraits of your uncle and aunt Phillips be placed
in the gallery at Pemberley. Put them next to your great-uncle the
judge. They are in the same profession, you know, only in different
“It would not be easy, indeed, to catch their expression, but their
colour and shape, and the eyelashes, so remarkably fine, might be
At that moment they were met from another walk by Mrs. Hurst and
confusion, lest they had been overheard.
Then taking the disengaged arm of Mr. Darcy, she left Elizabeth to walk
by herself. The path just admitted three. Mr. Darcy felt their rudeness,
“This walk is not wide enough for our party. We had better go into the
But Elizabeth, who had not the least inclination to remain with them,
She then ran gaily off, rejoicing as she rambled about, in the hope of
When the ladies removed after dinner, Elizabeth ran up to her
sister, and seeing her well guarded from cold, attended her into the
professions of pleasure; and Elizabeth had never seen them so agreeable
as they were during the hour which passed before the gentlemen appeared.
at their acquaintance with spirit.
But when the gentlemen entered, Jane was no longer the first object;
attention. The first half-hour was spent in piling up the fire, lest she
should suffer from the change of room; and she removed at his desire
to the other side of the fireplace, that she might be further from
the door. He then sat down by her, and talked scarcely to anyone
else. Elizabeth, at work in the opposite corner, saw it all with great
When tea was over, Mr. Hurst reminded his sister-in-law of the
the silence of the whole party on the subject seemed to justify her. Mr.
Hurst had therefore nothing to do, but to stretch himself on one of the
sofas and go to sleep. Darcy took up a book; Miss Bingley did the same;
and rings, joined now and then in her brother's conversation with Miss
was perpetually either making some inquiry, or looking at his page. She
question, and read on. At length, quite exhausted by the attempt to be
amused with her own book, which she had only chosen because it was the
it is to spend an evening in this way! I declare after all there is no
No one made any reply. She then yawned again, threw aside her book, and
cast her eyes round the room in quest for some amusement; when hearing
her brother mentioning a ball to Miss Bennet, she turned suddenly
“By the bye, Charles, are you really serious in meditating a dance at
Netherfield? I would advise you, before you determine on it, to consult
the wishes of the present party; I am much mistaken if there are
not some among us to whom a ball would be rather a punishment than a
“If you mean Darcy,” cried her brother, “he may go to bed, if he
chooses, before it begins--but as for the ball, it is quite a settled
“I should like balls infinitely better,” she replied, “if they were
carried on in a different manner; but there is something insufferably
tedious in the usual process of such a meeting. It would surely be much
more rational if conversation instead of dancing were made the order of
the day.”
about the room. Her figure was elegant, and she walked well; but
the desperation of her feelings, she resolved on one effort more, and,
turn about the room. I assure you it is very refreshing after sitting so
succeeded no less in the real object of her civility; Mr. Darcy looked
up. He was as much awake to the novelty of attention in that quarter as
directly invited to join their party, but he declined it, observing that
he could imagine but two motives for their choosing to walk up and down
the room together, with either of which motives his joining them would
meaning?”--and asked Elizabeth whether she could at all understand him?
anything, and persevered therefore in requiring an explanation of his
“I have not the smallest objection to explaining them,” said he, as soon
as she allowed him to speak. “You either choose this method of passing
the evening because you are in each other's confidence, and have secret
appear to the greatest advantage in walking; if the first, I would be
completely in your way, and if the second, I can admire you much better
as I sit by the fire.”
“Nothing so easy, if you have but the inclination,” said Elizabeth. “We
can all plague and punish one another. Tease him--laugh at him. Intimate
mind! No, no; I feel he may defy us there. And as to laughter, we will
The wisest and the best of men--nay, the wisest and best of their
“Certainly,” replied Elizabeth--“there are such people, but I hope I
am not one of _them_. I hope I never ridicule what is wise and good.
and I laugh at them whenever I can. But these, I suppose, are precisely
“Perhaps that is not possible for anyone. But it has been the study
“Yes, vanity is a weakness indeed. But pride--where there is a real
“and pray what is the result?”
but they are not, I hope, of understanding. My temper I dare not vouch
for. It is, I believe, too little yielding--certainly too little for the
convenience of the world. I cannot forget the follies and vices of others
so soon as I ought, nor their offenses against myself. My feelings
are not puffed about with every attempt to move them. My temper
evil--a natural defect, which not even the best education can overcome.”
them.”
Her sister had not the smallest objection, and the pianoforte was
it. He began to feel the danger of paying Elizabeth too much attention.
In consequence of an agreement between the sisters, Elizabeth wrote the
next morning to their mother, to beg that the carriage might be sent for
them in the course of the day. But Mrs. Bennet, who had calculated on
her daughters remaining at Netherfield till the following Tuesday, which
them with pleasure before. Her answer, therefore, was not propitious, at
Bennet sent them word that they could not possibly have the carriage
and his sister pressed them to stay longer, she could spare them
resolved--nor did she much expect it would be asked; and fearful, on the
contrary, as being considered as intruding themselves needlessly long,
length it was settled that their original design of leaving Netherfield
that morning should be mentioned, and the request made.
said of wishing them to stay at least till the following day to work
on Jane; and till the morrow their going was deferred. Miss Bingley was
then sorry that she had proposed the delay, for her jealousy and dislike
of one sister much exceeded her affection for the other.
The master of the house heard with real sorrow that they were to go so
Netherfield long enough. She attracted him more than he liked--and Miss
should _now_ escape him, nothing that could elevate her with the hope
suggested, his behaviour during the last day must have material weight
ten words to her through the whole of Saturday, and though they were
at one time left by themselves for half-an-hour, he adhered most
On Sunday, after morning service, the separation, so agreeable to almost
very rapidly, as well as her affection for Jane; and when they parted,
after assuring the latter of the pleasure it would always give her
to see her either at Longbourn or Netherfield, and embracing her most
tenderly, she even shook hands with the former. Elizabeth took leave of
the whole party in the liveliest of spirits.
They were not welcomed home very cordially by their mother. Mrs. Bennet
wondered at their coming, and thought them very wrong to give so much
trouble, and was sure Jane would have caught cold again. But their
father, though very laconic in his expressions of pleasure, was really
glad to see them; he had felt their importance in the family circle. The
evening conversation, when they were all assembled, had lost much of
its animation, and almost all its sense by the absence of Jane and
They found Mary, as usual, deep in the study of thorough-bass and human
threadbare morality to listen to. Catherine and Lydia had information
for them of a different sort. Much had been done and much had been said
in the regiment since the preceding Wednesday; several of the officers
had dined lately with their uncle, a private had been flogged, and it
“I hope, my dear,” said Mr. Bennet to his wife, as they were at
breakfast the next morning, “that you have ordered a good dinner to-day,
got to-day. Lydia, my love, ring the bell--I must speak to Hill this
never saw in the whole course of my life.”
This roused a general astonishment; and he had the pleasure of being
After amusing himself some time with their curiosity, he thus explained:
Pray do not talk of that odious man. I do think it is the hardest thing
in the world, that your estate should be entailed away from your own
to do something or other about it.”
Jane and Elizabeth tried to explain to her the nature of an entail. They
Mrs. Bennet was beyond the reach of reason, and she continued to rail
bitterly against the cruelty of settling an estate away from a family of
nothing can clear Mr. Collins from the guilt of inheriting Longbourn.
friends. Why could he not keep on quarreling with you, as his father did
father always gave me much uneasiness, and since I have had the
misfortune to lose him, I have frequently wished to heal the breach; but
Bennet.'--My mind, however, is now made up on the subject, for having
distinguished by the patronage of the Right Honourable Lady Catherine de
preferred me to the valuable rectory of this parish, where it shall be
are instituted by the Church of England. As a clergyman, moreover, I
feel it my duty to promote and establish the blessing of peace in
all families within the reach of my influence; and on these grounds I
that the circumstance of my being next in the entail of Longbourn estate
will be kindly overlooked on your side, and not lead you to reject the
offered olive-branch. I cannot be otherwise than concerned at being the
it, as well as to assure you of my readiness to make them every possible
receive me into your house, I propose myself the satisfaction of waiting
shall probably trespass on your hospitality till the Saturday se'ennight
following, which I can do without any inconvenience, as Lady Catherine
that some other clergyman is engaged to do the duty of the day.--I
“At four o'clock, therefore, we may expect this peace-making gentleman,”
 said Mr. Bennet, as he folded up the letter. “He seems to be a most
prove a valuable acquaintance, especially if Lady Catherine should be so
“There is some sense in what he says about the girls, however, and if
he is disposed to make them any amends, I shall not be the person to
to make us the atonement he thinks our due, the wish is certainly to his
Catherine, and his kind intention of christening, marrying, and burying
mean by apologising for being next in the entail?--We cannot suppose he
“No, my dear, I think not. I have great hopes of finding him quite the
“In point of composition,” said Mary, “the letter does not seem
defective. The idea of the olive-branch perhaps is not wholly new, yet I
To Catherine and Lydia, neither the letter nor its writer were in any
degree interesting. It was next to impossible that their cousin should
come in a scarlet coat, and it was now some weeks since they had
received pleasure from the society of a man in any other colour. As for
their mother, Mr. Collins's letter had done away much of her ill-will,
politeness by the whole family. Mr. Bennet indeed said little; but the
ladies were ready enough to talk, and Mr. Collins seemed neither in
daughters; said he had heard much of their beauty, but that in this
instance fame had fallen short of the truth; and added, that he did
not doubt her seeing them all in due time disposed of in marriage. This
gallantry was not much to the taste of some of his hearers; but Mrs.
prove so, for else they will be destitute enough. Things are settled so
“You allude, perhaps, to the entail of this estate.”
will go when once they come to be entailed.”
“I am very sensible, madam, of the hardship to my fair cousins, and
could say much on the subject, but that I am cautious of appearing
forward and precipitate. But I can assure the young ladies that I come
prepared to admire them. At present I will not say more; but, perhaps,
He was interrupted by a summons to dinner; and the girls smiled on each
other. They were not the only objects of Mr. Collins's admiration. The
hall, the dining-room, and all its furniture, were examined and praised;
heart, but for the mortifying supposition of his viewing it all as his
he begged to know to which of his fair cousins the excellency of its
cooking was owing. But he was set right there by Mrs. Bennet, who
assured him with some asperity that they were very well able to keep a
good cook, and that her daughters had nothing to do in the kitchen. He
During dinner, Mr. Bennet scarcely spoke at all; but when the servants
guest, and therefore started a subject in which he expected him to
Catherine de Bourgh's attention to his wishes, and consideration for
experienced from Lady Catherine. She had been graciously pleased to
approve of both of the discourses which he had already had the honour of
and had sent for him only the Saturday before, to make up her pool of
quadrille in the evening. Lady Catherine was reckoned proud by many
She had always spoken to him as she would to any other gentleman; she
made not the smallest objection to his joining in the society of the
neighbourhood nor to his leaving the parish occasionally for a week or
approved all the alterations he had been making, and had even vouchsafed
to suggest some herself--some shelves in the closet up stairs.”
“She has only one daughter, the heiress of Rosings, and of very
“Ah!” said Mrs. Bennet, shaking her head, “then she is better off than
“She is a most charming young lady indeed. Lady Catherine herself says
that, in point of true beauty, Miss de Bourgh is far superior to the
handsomest of her sex, because there is that in her features which marks
the young lady of distinguished birth. She is unfortunately of a sickly
accomplishments which she could not have otherwise failed of, as I am
informed by the lady who superintended her education, and who still
resides with them. But she is perfectly amiable, and often condescends
“Has she been presented? I do not remember her name among the ladies at
and by that means, as I told Lady Catherine one day, has deprived the
with the idea; and you may imagine that I am happy on every occasion to
to ladies. I have more than once observed to Lady Catherine, that
her charming daughter seemed born to be a duchess, and that the most
her. These are the kind of little things which please her ladyship, and
that you possess the talent of flattering with delicacy. May I ask
whether these pleasing attentions proceed from the impulse of the
moment, or are the result of previous study?”
“They arise chiefly from what is passing at the time, and though I
give them as unstudied an air as possible.”
as he had hoped, and he listened to him with the keenest enjoyment,
maintaining at the same time the most resolute composure of countenance,
By tea-time, however, the dose had been enough, and Mr. Bennet was glad
to take his guest into the drawing-room again, and, when tea was over,
glad to invite him to read aloud to the ladies. Mr. Collins readily
him, and Lydia exclaimed. Other books were produced, and after some
deliberation he chose Fordyce's Sermons. Lydia gaped as he opened the
of a serious stamp, though written solely for their benefit. It amazes
me, I confess; for, certainly, there can be nothing so advantageous to
them as instruction. But I will no longer importune my young cousin.”
backgammon. Mr. Bennet accepted the challenge, observing that he acted
very wisely in leaving the girls to their own trifling amusements.
resume his book; but Mr. Collins, after assuring them that he bore his
affront, seated himself at another table with Mr. Bennet, and prepared
Mr. Collins was not a sensible man, and the deficiency of nature had
been but little assisted by education or society; the greatest part
of his life having been spent under the guidance of an illiterate and
miserly father; and though he belonged to one of the universities, he
had merely kept the necessary terms, without forming at it any useful
acquaintance. The subjection in which his father had brought him up had
good deal counteracted by the self-conceit of a weak head, living in
retirement, and the consequential feelings of early and unexpected
prosperity. A fortunate chance had recommended him to Lady Catherine de
Bourgh when the living of Hunsford was vacant; and the respect which
clergyman, and his right as a rector, made him altogether a mixture of
marry; and in seeking a reconciliation with the Longbourn family he had
a wife in view, as he meant to choose one of the daughters, if he found
them as handsome and amiable as they were represented by common report.
This was his plan of amends--of atonement--for inheriting their father's
His plan did not vary on seeing them. Miss Bennet's lovely face
was due to seniority; and for the first evening _she_ was his settled
to the avowal of his hopes, that a mistress might be found for it at
encouragement, a caution against the very Jane he had fixed on. “As to
done--done while Mrs. Bennet was stirring the fire. Elizabeth, equally
Mrs. Bennet treasured up the hint, and trusted that she might soon have
two daughters married; and the man whom she could not bear to speak of
the day before was now high in her good graces.
except Mary agreed to go with her; and Mr. Collins was to attend them,
at the request of Mr. Bennet, who was most anxious to get rid of him,
and have his library to himself; for thither Mr. Collins had followed
him after breakfast; and there he would continue, nominally engaged with
one of the largest folios in the collection, but really talking to Mr.
Elizabeth, to meet with folly and conceit in every other room of the
house, he was used to be free from them there; his civility, therefore,
was most prompt in inviting Mr. Collins to join his daughters in their
cousins, their time passed till they entered Meryton. The attention of
the younger ones was then no longer to be gained by him. Their eyes were
immediately wandering up in the street in quest of the officers, and
a shop window, could recall them.
But the attention of every lady was soon caught by a young man, whom
they had never seen before, of most gentlemanlike appearance, walking
with another officer on the other side of the way. The officer was
the very Mr. Denny concerning whose return from London Lydia came
to inquire, and he bowed as they passed. All were struck with the
determined if possible to find out, led the way across the street, under
had just gained the pavement when the two gentlemen, turning back, had
reached the same spot. Mr. Denny addressed them directly, and entreated
him the day before from town, and he was happy to say had accepted a
commission in their corps. This was exactly as it should be; for the
His appearance was greatly in his favour; he had all the best part of
of conversation--a readiness at the same time perfectly correct and
unassuming; and the whole party were still standing and talking together
very agreeably, when the sound of horses drew their notice, and Darcy
and Bingley were seen riding down the street. On distinguishing the
ladies of the group, the two gentlemen came directly towards them, and
began the usual civilities. Bingley was the principal spokesman, and
Miss Bennet the principal object. He was then, he said, on his way to
on Elizabeth, when they were suddenly arrested by the sight of the
stranger, and Elizabeth happening to see the countenance of both as they
looked at each other, was all astonishment at the effect of the meeting.
Both changed colour, one looked white, the other red. Mr. Wickham,
deigned to return. What could be the meaning of it? It was impossible to
In another minute, Mr. Bingley, but without seeming to have noticed what
Mr. Denny and Mr. Wickham walked with the young ladies to the door of
Mr. Phillip's house, and then made their bows, in spite of Miss Lydia's
pressing entreaties that they should come in, and even in spite of
Mrs. Phillips's throwing up the parlour window and loudly seconding the
Mrs. Phillips was always glad to see her nieces; and the two eldest,
from their recent absence, were particularly welcome, and she was
eagerly expressing her surprise at their sudden return home, which, as
their own carriage had not fetched them, she should have known nothing
about, if she had not happened to see Mr. Jones's shop-boy in the
street, who had told her that they were not to send any more draughts to
Netherfield because the Miss Bennets were come away, when her civility
however, might be justified by his relationship to the young ladies who
put to an end by exclamations and inquiries about the other; of whom,
however, she could only tell her nieces what they already knew, that
lieutenant's commission in the ----shire. She had been watching him the
last hour, she said, as he walked up and down the street, and had Mr.
Wickham appeared, Kitty and Lydia would certainly have continued the
occupation, but unluckily no one passed windows now except a few of the
officers, who, in comparison with the stranger, were become “stupid,
disagreeable fellows.” Some of them were to dine with the Phillipses
the next day, and their aunt promised to make her husband call on Mr.
Wickham, and give him an invitation also, if the family from Longbourn
would come in the evening. This was agreed to, and Mrs. Phillips
protested that they would have a nice comfortable noisy game of lottery
delights was very cheering, and they parted in mutual good spirits. Mr.
Collins repeated his apologies in quitting the room, and was assured
with unwearying civility that they were perfectly needless.
As they walked home, Elizabeth related to Jane what she had seen pass
between the two gentlemen; but though Jane would have defended either
or both, had they appeared to be in the wrong, she could no more explain
Catherine and her daughter, he had never seen a more elegant woman;
for she had not only received him with the utmost civility, but even
pointedly included him in her invitation for the next evening, although
attributed to his connection with them, but yet he had never met with so
much attention in the whole course of his life.
As no objection was made to the young people's engagement with their
a single evening during his visit were most steadily resisted, the coach
the girls had the pleasure of hearing, as they entered the drawing-room,
that Mr. Wickham had accepted their uncle's invitation, and was then in
the house.
When this information was given, and they had all taken their seats, Mr.
struck with the size and furniture of the apartment, that he declared he
might almost have supposed himself in the small summer breakfast
Rosings was, and who was its proprietor--when she had listened to the
description of only one of Lady Catherine's drawing-rooms, and found
that the chimney-piece alone had cost eight hundred pounds, she felt all
the force of the compliment, and would hardly have resented a comparison
with the housekeeper's room.
In describing to her all the grandeur of Lady Catherine and her mansion,
the improvements it was receiving, he was happily employed until the
gentlemen joined them; and he found in Mrs. Phillips a very attentive
soon as she could. To the girls, who could not listen to their cousin,
their own indifferent imitations of china on the mantelpiece, the
The gentlemen did approach, and when Mr. Wickham walked into the room,
Elizabeth felt that she had neither been seeing him before, nor thinking
of him since, with the smallest degree of unreasonable admiration.
The officers of the ----shire were in general a very creditable,
gentlemanlike set, and the best of them were of the present party; but
Mr. Wickham was as far beyond them all in person, countenance, air, and
walk, as _they_ were superior to the broad-faced, stuffy uncle Phillips,
breathing port wine, who followed them into the room.
Mr. Wickham was the happy man towards whom almost every female eye was
turned, and Elizabeth was the happy woman by whom he finally seated
himself; and the agreeable manner in which he immediately fell into
that the commonest, dullest, most threadbare topic might be rendered
interesting by the skill of the speaker.
With such rivals for the notice of the fair as Mr. Wickham and the
officers, Mr. Collins seemed to sink into insignificance; to the young
supplied with coffee and muffin. When the card-tables were placed, he
had the opportunity of obliging her in turn, by sitting down to whist.
“I know little of the game at present,” said he, “but I shall be glad
received at the other table between Elizabeth and Lydia. At first there
she soon grew too much interested in the game, too eager in making bets
Allowing for the common demands of the game, Mr. Wickham was therefore
told--the history of his acquaintance with Mr. Darcy. She dared not
relieved. Mr. Wickham began the subject himself. He inquired how far
Netherfield was from Meryton; and, after receiving her answer, asked in
a hesitating manner how long Mr. Darcy had been staying there.
“About a month,” said Elizabeth; and then, unwilling to let the subject
“Yes,” replied Mr. Wickham; “his estate there is a noble one. A clear
seeing, as you probably might, the very cold manner of our meeting
spent four days in the same house with him, and I think him very
agreeable or otherwise. I am not qualified to form one. I have known him
the neighbourhood, except Netherfield. He is not at all liked in
their deserts; but with _him_ I believe it does not often happen. The
“I wonder,” said he, at the next opportunity of speaking, “whether he is
was at Netherfield. I hope your plans in favour of the ----shire will
not be affected by his being in the neighbourhood.”
avoiding _him_ but what I might proclaim before all the world, a sense
is. His father, Miss Bennet, the late Mr. Darcy, was one of the best men
that ever breathed, and the truest friend I ever had; and I can never
be in company with this Mr. Darcy without being grieved to the soul by
everything, rather than his disappointing the hopes and disgracing the
memory of his father.”
Elizabeth found the interest of the subject increase, and listened with
all her heart; but the delicacy of it prevented further inquiry.
Mr. Wickham began to speak on more general topics, Meryton, the
neighbourhood, the society, appearing highly pleased with all that
he had yet seen, and speaking of the latter with gentle but very
“It was the prospect of constant society, and good society,” he added,
“which was my chief inducement to enter the ----shire. I knew it to be
further by his account of their present quarters, and the very great
attentions and excellent acquaintances Meryton had procured them.
was brought up for the church, and I should at this time have been in
possession of a most valuable living, had it pleased the gentleman we
“Yes--the late Mr. Darcy bequeathed me the next presentation of the best
living in his gift. He was my godfather, and excessively attached to me.
and thought he had done it; but when the living fell, it was given
“There was just such an informality in the terms of the bequest as to
give me no hope from law. A man of honour could not have doubted the
it is, that the living became vacant two years ago, exactly as I was
of an age to hold it, and that it was given to another man; and no
recall nothing worse. But the fact is, that we are very different sort
“Some time or other he _will_ be--but it shall not be by _me_. Till I
can forget his father, I can never defy or expose _him_.”
ever as he expressed them.
attribute in some measure to jealousy. Had the late Mr. Darcy liked me
less, his son might have borne with me better; but his father's uncommon
not a temper to bear the sort of competition in which we stood--the sort
remember his boasting one day, at Netherfield, of the implacability of
“I will not trust myself on the subject,” replied Wickham; “I can hardly
treat in such a manner the godson, the friend, the favourite of his
father!” She could have added, “A young man, too, like _you_, whose very
connected together, as I think you said, in the closest manner!”
“We were born in the same parish, within the same park; the greatest
part of our youth was passed together; inmates of the same house,
sharing the same amusements, objects of the same parental care. _My_
father began life in the profession which your uncle, Mr. Phillips,
use to the late Mr. Darcy and devoted all his time to the care of the
be under the greatest obligations to my father's active superintendence,
and when, immediately before my father's death, Mr. Darcy gave him a
“How strange!” cried Elizabeth. “How abominable! I wonder that the very
connected him nearer with virtue than with any other feeling. But we are
none of us consistent, and in his behaviour to me there were stronger
freely, to display hospitality, to assist his tenants, and relieve the
his father was--have done this. Not to appear to disgrace his family,
to degenerate from the popular qualities, or lose the influence of the
Pemberley House, is a powerful motive. He has also _brotherly_ pride,
which, with _some_ brotherly affection, makes him a very kind and
as the most attentive and best of brothers.”
speak ill of a Darcy. But she is too much like her brother--very, very
and, I understand, highly accomplished. Since her father's death, her
After many pauses and many trials of other subjects, Elizabeth could not
help reverting once more to the first, and saying:
be in friendship with such a man? How can they suit each other? Do you
a very different man from what he is to the less prosperous. His
pride never deserts him; but with the rich he is liberal-minded, just,
The whist party soon afterwards breaking up, the players gathered round
the other table and Mr. Collins took his station between his cousin
made by the latter. It had not been very great; he had lost every
point; but when Mrs. Phillips began to express her concern thereupon,
he assured her with much earnest gravity that it was not of the least
importance, that he considered the money as a mere trifle, and begged
card-table, they must take their chances of these things, and happily I
are undoubtedly many who could not say the same, but thanks to Lady
Catherine de Bourgh, I am removed far beyond the necessity of regarding
a few moments, he asked Elizabeth in a low voice whether her relation
was very intimately acquainted with the family of de Bourgh.
“Lady Catherine de Bourgh,” she replied, “has very lately given him
“You know of course that Lady Catherine de Bourgh and Lady Anne Darcy
were sisters; consequently that she is aunt to the present Mr. Darcy.”
“No, indeed, I did not. I knew nothing at all of Lady Catherine's
connections. I never heard of her existence till the day before
believed that she and her cousin will unite the two estates.”
self-destined for another.
“Mr. Collins,” said she, “speaks highly both of Lady Catherine and her
her, and that her manners were dictatorial and insolent. She has the
reputation of being remarkably sensible and clever; but I rather believe
her authoritative manner, and the rest from the pride for her
understanding of the first class.”
they continued talking together, with mutual satisfaction till supper
put an end to cards, and gave the rest of the ladies their share of Mr.
Wickham's attentions. There could be no conversation in the noise
the way home; but there was not time for her even to mention his name
as they went, for neither Lydia nor Mr. Collins were once silent. Lydia
talked incessantly of lottery tickets, of the fish she had lost and the
fish she had won; and Mr. Collins in describing the civility of Mr. and
Mrs. Phillips, protesting that he did not in the least regard his losses
at whist, enumerating all the dishes at supper, and repeatedly fearing
before the carriage stopped at Longbourn House.
Elizabeth related to Jane the next day what had passed between Mr.
Bingley's regard; and yet, it was not in her nature to question the
interest all her tender feelings; and nothing remained therefore to be
done, but to think well of them both, to defend the conduct of each,
and throw into the account of accident or mistake whatever could not be
otherwise explained.
or other, of which we can form no idea. Interested people have perhaps
misrepresented each to the other. It is, in short, impossible for us to
conjecture the causes or circumstances which may have alienated them,
without actual blame on either side.”
behalf of the interested people who have probably been concerned in the
business? Do clear _them_ too, or we shall be obliged to think ill of
it places Mr. Darcy, to be treating his father's favourite in such
a manner, one whom his father had promised to provide for. It is
be not so, let Mr. Darcy contradict it. Besides, there was truth in his
if he _had_ been imposed on, would have much to suffer when the affair
The two young ladies were summoned from the shrubbery, where this
conversation passed, by the arrival of the very persons of whom they had
been speaking; Mr. Bingley and his sisters came to give their personal
invitation for the long-expected ball at Netherfield, which was fixed
for the following Tuesday. The two ladies were delighted to see their
dear friend again, called it an age since they had met, and repeatedly
asked what she had been doing with herself since their separation. To
the rest of the family they paid little attention; avoiding Mrs. Bennet
the others. They were soon gone again, rising from their seats with an
activity which took their brother by surprise, and hurrying off as if
The prospect of the Netherfield ball was extremely agreeable to every
female of the family. Mrs. Bennet chose to consider it as given in
by receiving the invitation from Mr. Bingley himself, instead of a
ceremonious card. Jane pictured to herself a happy evening in the
society of her two friends, and the attentions of their brother; and
and behaviour. The happiness anticipated by Catherine and Lydia depended
less on any single event, or any particular person, for though they
each, like Elizabeth, meant to dance half the evening with Mr. Wickham,
he was by no means the only partner who could satisfy them, and a ball
him whether he intended to accept Mr. Bingley's invitation, and if
he did, whether he would think it proper to join in the evening's
amusement; and she was rather surprised to find that he entertained no
either from the Archbishop, or Lady Catherine de Bourgh, by venturing to
“I am by no means of the opinion, I assure you,” said he, “that a ball
myself, that I shall hope to be honoured with the hands of all my fair
cousins in the course of the evening; and I take this opportunity of
soliciting yours, Miss Elizabeth, for the two first dances especially,
a preference which I trust my cousin Jane will attribute to the right
good a grace as she could. She was not the better pleased with his
gallantry from the idea it suggested of something more. It now first
quadrille table at Rosings, in the absence of more eligible visitors.
her mother gave her to understand that the probability of their marriage
to take the hint, being well aware that a serious dispute must be the
consequence of any reply. Mr. Collins might never make the offer, and
If there had not been a Netherfield ball to prepare for and talk of, the
time, for from the day of the invitation, to the day of the ball, there
was such a succession of rain as prevented their walking to Meryton
once. No aunt, no officers, no news could be sought after--the very
shoe-roses for Netherfield were got by proxy. Even Elizabeth might have
found some trial of her patience in weather which totally suspended the
Till Elizabeth entered the drawing-room at Netherfield, and looked in
vain for Mr. Wickham among the cluster of red coats there assembled, a
usual care, and prepared in the highest spirits for the conquest of all
might be won in the course of the evening. But in an instant arose
the dreadful suspicion of his being purposely omitted for Mr. Darcy's
pleasure in the Bingleys' invitation to the officers; and though
this was not exactly the case, the absolute fact of his absence was
told them that Wickham had been obliged to go to town on business the
feeling of displeasure against the former was so sharpened by immediate
the polite inquiries which he directly afterwards approached to make.
of her own was destroyed for the evening, it could not dwell long on her
to the oddities of her cousin, and to point him out to her particular
they were dances of mortification. Mr. Collins, awkward and solemn,
aware of it, gave her all the shame and misery which a disagreeable
She danced next with an officer, and had the refreshment of talking of
“Heaven forbid! _That_ would be the greatest misfortune of all! To find
When the dancing recommenced, however, and Darcy approached to claim her
in the eyes of a man ten times his consequence. Elizabeth made no
answer, and took her place in the set, amazed at the dignity to which
reading in her neighbours' looks, their equal amazement in beholding
imagine that their silence was to last through the two dances, and at
be the greater punishment to her partner to oblige him to talk, she made
some slight observation on the dance. He replied, and was again
about the dance, and _you_ ought to make some sort of remark on the size
of the room, or the number of couples.”
“Very well. That reply will do for the present. Perhaps by and by I may
“Do you talk by rule, then, while you are dancing?”
entirely silent for half an hour together; and yet for the advantage of
_some_, conversation ought to be so arranged, as that they may have the
“Are you consulting your own feelings in the present case, or do you
similarity in the turn of our minds. We are each of an unsocial,
something that will amaze the whole room, and be handed down to
posterity with all the eclat of a proverb.”
He made no answer, and they were again silent till they had gone down
the dance, when he asked her if she and her sisters did not very often
walk to Meryton. She answered in the affirmative, and, unable to resist
the temptation, added, “When you met us there the other day, we had just
as may ensure his _making_ friends--whether he may be equally capable of
_retaining_ them, is less certain.”
Darcy made no answer, and seemed desirous of changing the subject. At
that moment, Sir William Lucas appeared close to them, meaning to pass
through the set to the other side of the room; but on perceiving Mr.
superior dancing is not often seen. It is evident that you belong to the
her sister and Bingley) shall take place. What congratulations will then
will not thank me for detaining you from the bewitching converse of that
Jane, who were dancing together. Recovering himself, however, shortly,
interrupted two people in the room who had less to say for themselves.
“Books--oh! no. I am sure we never read the same, or not with the same
“I am sorry you think so; but if that be the case, there can at least be
thoughts had wandered far from the subject, as soon afterwards appeared
“It is particularly incumbent on those who never change their opinion,
“May I ask to what these questions tend?”
“Merely to the illustration of _your_ character,” said she, endeavouring
not to sketch my character at the present moment, as there is reason to
fear that the performance would reflect no credit on either.”
“But if I do not take your likeness now, I may never have another
She said no more, and they went down the other dance and parted in
for in Darcy's breast there was a tolerably powerful feeling towards
another.
questions; and I find that the young man quite forgot to tell you, among
his other communication, that he was the son of old Wickham, the late
using him ill, it is perfectly false; for, on the contrary, he has
Mr. Darcy in a most infamous manner. I do not know the particulars, but
I know very well that Mr. Darcy is not in the least to blame, that he
cannot bear to hear George Wickham mentioned, and that though my brother
the officers, he was excessively glad to find that he had taken himself
out of the way. His coming into the country at all is a most insolent
“His guilt and his descent appear by your account to be the same,” said
than of being the son of Mr. Darcy's steward, and of _that_, I can
nothing in it but your own wilful ignorance and the malice of Mr.
Darcy.” She then sought her eldest sister, who had undertaken to make
inquiries on the same subject of Bingley. Jane met her with a smile of
marked how well she was satisfied with the occurrences of the evening.
before the hope of Jane's being in the fairest way for happiness.
satisfactory to tell you. Mr. Bingley does not know the whole of
his history, and is quite ignorant of the circumstances which have
principally offended Mr. Darcy; but he will vouch for the good conduct,
the probity, and honour of his friend, and is perfectly convinced that
“No; he never saw him till the other morning at Meryton.”
“This account then is what he has received from Mr. Darcy. I am
satisfied. But what does he say of the living?”
“He does not exactly recollect the circumstances, though he has heard
them from Mr. Darcy more than once, but he believes that it was left to
since he is unacquainted with several parts of the story, and has learnt
the rest from that friend himself, I shall venture to still think of
She then changed the discourse to one more gratifying to each, and on
which there could be no difference of sentiment. Elizabeth listened with
delight to the happy, though modest hopes which Jane entertained of Mr.
in it. On their being joined by Mr. Bingley himself, Elizabeth withdrew
to Miss Lucas; to whose inquiry after the pleasantness of her last
partner she had scarcely replied, before Mr. Collins came up to them,
“I have found out,” said he, “by a singular accident, that there is now
in the room a near relation of my patroness. I happened to overhear the
gentleman himself mentioning to the young lady who does the honours of
the house the names of his cousin Miss de Bourgh, and of her mother Lady
Catherine. How wonderfully these sort of things occur! Who would have
thought of my meeting with, perhaps, a nephew of Lady Catherine de
Bourgh in this assembly! I am most thankful that the discovery is made
ignorance of the connection must plead my apology.”
I believe him to be Lady Catherine's _nephew_. It will be in my power to
as an impertinent freedom, rather than a compliment to his aunt; that
it was not in the least necessary there should be any notice on either
side; and that if it were, it must belong to Mr. Darcy, the superior in
consequence, to begin the acquaintance. Mr. Collins listened to her
with the determined air of following his own inclination, and, when she
“My dear Miss Elizabeth, I have the highest opinion in the world in
your excellent judgement in all matters within the scope of your
understanding; but permit me to say, that there must be a wide
difference between the established forms of ceremony amongst the laity,
and those which regulate the clergy; for, give me leave to observe that
I consider the clerical office as equal in point of dignity with
the highest rank in the kingdom--provided that a proper humility of
behaviour is at the same time maintained. You must therefore allow me to
follow the dictates of my conscience on this occasion, which leads me to
profit by your advice, which on every other subject shall be my constant
guide, though in the case before us I consider myself more fitted by
it, she felt as if hearing it all, and saw in the motion of his lips the
words “apology,” “Hunsford,” and “Lady Catherine de Bourgh.” It vexed
abundantly increasing with the length of his second speech, and at the
end of it he only made him a slight bow, and moved another way. Mr.
Collins then returned to Elizabeth.
reception. Mr. Darcy seemed much pleased with the attention. He answered
me with the utmost civility, and even paid me the compliment of saying
that he was so well convinced of Lady Catherine's discernment as to be
handsome thought. Upon the whole, I am much pleased with him.”
her attention almost entirely on her sister and Mr. Bingley; and the
that very house, in all the felicity which a marriage of true affection
endeavouring even to like Bingley's two sisters. Her mother's thoughts
she plainly saw were bent the same way, and she determined not to
venture near her, lest she might hear too much. When they sat down to
supper, therefore, she considered it a most unlucky perverseness which
placed them within one of each other; and deeply was she vexed to find
that her mother was talking to that one person (Lady Lucas) freely,
seemed incapable of fatigue while enumerating the advantages of the
three miles from them, were the first points of self-gratulation; and
then it was such a comfort to think how fond the two sisters were of
Jane, and to be certain that they must desire the connection as much as
daughters, as Jane's marrying so greatly must throw them in the way of
other rich men; and lastly, it was so pleasant at her time of life to be
able to consign her single daughters to the care of their sister, that
such occasions it is the etiquette; but no one was less likely than Mrs.
fortunate, though evidently and triumphantly believing there was no
In vain did Elizabeth endeavour to check the rapidity of her mother's
whisper; for, to her inexpressible vexation, she could perceive that the
chief of it was overheard by Mr. Darcy, who sat opposite to them. Her
mother only scolded her for being nonsensical.
Nothing that she could say, however, had any influence. Her mother would
talk of her views in the same intelligible tone. Elizabeth blushed and
she dreaded; for though he was not always looking at her mother, she was
had been long yawning at the repetition of delights which she saw no
likelihood of sharing, was left to the comforts of cold ham and
chicken. Elizabeth now began to revive. But not long was the interval of
she had the mortification of seeing Mary, after very little entreaty,
preparing to oblige the company. By many significant looks and silent
but in vain; Mary would not understand them; such an opportunity of
progress through the several stanzas with an impatience which was very
ill rewarded at their close; for Mary, on receiving, amongst the thanks
of the table, the hint of a hope that she might be prevailed on to
favour them again, after the pause of half a minute began another.
Bingley. She looked at his two sisters, and saw them making signs
of derision at each other, and at Darcy, who continued, however,
imperturbably grave. She looked at her father to entreat his
interference, lest Mary should be singing all night. He took the hint,
extremely well, child. You have delighted us long enough. Let the other
Elizabeth, sorry for her, and sorry for her father's speech, was afraid
her anxiety had done no good. Others of the party were now applied to.
should have great pleasure, I am sure, in obliging the company with an
compatible with the profession of a clergyman. I do not mean, however,
to music, for there are certainly other things to be attended to. The
rector of a parish has much to do. In the first place, he must make
such an agreement for tithes as may be beneficial to himself and not
offensive to his patron. He must write his own sermons; and the time
that remains will not be too much for his parish duties, and the care
him of that duty; nor could I think well of the man who should omit an
occasion of testifying his respect towards anybody connected with the
been spoken so loud as to be heard by half the room. Many stared--many
expose themselves as much as they could during the evening, it would
have been impossible for them to play their parts with more spirit or
that some of the exhibition had escaped his notice, and that his
feelings were not of a sort to be much distressed by the folly which he
and she could not determine whether the silent contempt of the
gentleman, or the insolent smiles of the ladies, were more intolerable.
The rest of the evening brought her little amusement. She was teased by
power to dance with others. In vain did she entreat him to stand up with
somebody else, and offer to introduce him to any young lady in the room.
her and that he should therefore make a point of remaining close to her
the whole evening. There was no arguing upon such a project. She owed
her greatest relief to her friend Miss Lucas, who often joined them, and
She was at least free from the offense of Mr. Darcy's further notice;
disengaged, he never came near enough to speak. She felt it to be the
The Longbourn party were the last of all the company to depart, and, by
a manoeuvre of Mrs. Bennet, had to wait for their carriage a quarter of
an hour after everybody else was gone, which gave them time to see how
heartily they were wished away by some of the family. Mrs. Hurst and her
sister scarcely opened their mouths, except to complain of fatigue, and
were evidently impatient to have the house to themselves. They repulsed
languor over the whole party, which was very little relieved by the
sisters on the elegance of their entertainment, and the hospitality and
politeness which had marked their behaviour to their guests. Darcy said
nothing at all. Mr. Bennet, in equal silence, was enjoying the scene.
Mr. Bingley and Jane were standing together, a little detached from the
rest, and talked only to each other. Elizabeth preserved as steady a
silence as either Mrs. Hurst or Miss Bingley; and even Lydia was too
much fatigued to utter more than the occasional exclamation of “Lord,
When at length they arose to take leave, Mrs. Bennet was most pressingly
civil in her hope of seeing the whole family soon at Longbourn, and
would make them by eating a family dinner with them at any time, without
the ceremony of a formal invitation. Bingley was all grateful pleasure,
and he readily engaged for taking the earliest opportunity of waiting on
her, after his return from London, whither he was obliged to go the next
Mrs. Bennet was perfectly satisfied, and quitted the house under the
delightful persuasion that, allowing for the necessary preparations of
settlements, new carriages, and wedding clothes, she should undoubtedly
see her daughter settled at Netherfield in the course of three or four
months. Of having another daughter married to Mr. Collins, she thought
Elizabeth was the least dear to her of all her children; and though the
man and the match were quite good enough for _her_, the worth of each
was eclipsed by Mr. Bingley and Netherfield.
his leave of absence extended only to the following Saturday, and having
the moment, he set about it in a very orderly manner, with all the
observances, which he supposed a regular part of the business. On
finding Mrs. Bennet, Elizabeth, and one of the younger girls together,
soon after breakfast, he addressed the mother in these words:
when I solicit for the honour of a private audience with her in the
want you up stairs.” And, gathering her work together, she was hastening
conceal, by incessant employment the feelings which were divided between
they were gone, Mr. Collins began.
doing you any disservice, rather adds to your other perfections. You
would have been less amiable in my eyes had there _not_ been this little
mother's permission for this address. You can hardly doubt the
soon as I entered the house, I singled you out as the companion of
marrying--and, moreover, for coming into Hertfordshire with the design
not use the short pause he allowed in any attempt to stop him further,
every clergyman in easy circumstances (like myself) to set the example
to have mentioned earlier, that it is the particular advice and
recommendation of the very noble lady whom I have the honour of calling
too!) on this subject; and it was but the very Saturday night before I
you can, bring her to Hunsford, and I will visit her.' Allow me, by the
way, to observe, my fair cousin, that I do not reckon the notice
and kindness of Lady Catherine de Bourgh as among the least of the
acceptable to her, especially when tempered with the silence and
can assure you there are many amiable young women. But the fact is, that
being, as I am, to inherit this estate after the death of your honoured
father (who, however, may live many years longer), I could not satisfy
the loss to them might be as little as possible, when the melancholy
remains for me but to assure you in the most animated language of the
shall make no demand of that nature on your father, since I am well
in the four per cents, which will not be yours till after your mother's
therefore, I shall be uniformly silent; and you may assure yourself that
answer. Let me do it without further loss of time. Accept my thanks for
the compliment you are paying me. I am very sensible of the honour of
your proposals, but it is impossible for me to do otherwise than to
decline them.”
“I am not now to learn,” replied Mr. Collins, with a formal wave of the
hand, “that it is usual with young ladies to reject the addresses of the
man whom they secretly mean to accept, when he first applies for their
favour; and that sometimes the refusal is repeated a second, or even a
third time. I am therefore by no means discouraged by what you have just
said, and shall hope to lead you to the altar ere long.”
“Upon my word, sir,” cried Elizabeth, “your hope is a rather
one of those young ladies (if such young ladies there are) who are so
daring as to risk their happiness on the chance of being asked a second
happy, and I am convinced that I am the last woman in the world who
could make you so. Nay, were your friend Lady Catherine to know me, I
am persuaded she would find me in every respect ill qualified for the
“Were it certain that Lady Catherine would think so,” said Mr. Collins
disapprove of you. And you may be certain when I have the honour of
seeing her again, I shall speak in the very highest terms of your
modesty, economy, and other amiable qualification.”
must give me leave to judge for myself, and pay me the compliment
refusing your hand, do all in my power to prevent your being otherwise.
In making me the offer, you must have satisfied the delicacy of your
be considered, therefore, as finally settled.” And rising as she
thus spoke, she would have quitted the room, had Mr. Collins not thus
“When I do myself the honour of speaking to you next on the subject, I
know it to be the established custom of your sex to reject a man on
the first application, and perhaps you have even now said as much to
encourage my suit as would be consistent with the true delicacy of the
exceedingly. If what I have hitherto said can appear to you in the form
believing it are briefly these: It does not appear to me that my hand is
unworthy of your acceptance, or that the establishment I can offer would
be any other than highly desirable. My situation in life, my connections
with the family of de Bourgh, and my relationship to your own, are
circumstances highly in my favour; and you should take it into further
means certain that another offer of marriage may ever be made you. Your
the effects of your loveliness and amiable qualifications. As I must
therefore conclude that you are not serious in your rejection of me,
suspense, according to the usual practice of elegant females.”
rather be paid the compliment of being believed sincere. I thank you
again and again for the honour you have done me in your proposals, but
to accept them is absolutely impossible. My feelings in every respect
the truth from her heart.”
gallantry; “and I am persuaded that when sanctioned by the express
encouragement, to apply to her father, whose negative might be uttered
not be mistaken for the affectation and coquetry of an elegant female.
Mr. Collins was not left long to the silent contemplation of his
successful love; for Mrs. Bennet, having dawdled about in the vestibule
to watch for the end of the conference, no sooner saw Elizabeth open
the door and with quick step pass her towards the staircase, than she
entered the breakfast-room, and congratulated both him and herself in
warm terms on the happy prospect of their nearer connection. Mr. Collins
received and returned these felicitations with equal pleasure, and then
proceeded to relate the particulars of their interview, with the result
of which he trusted he had every reason to be satisfied, since the
from her bashful modesty and the genuine delicacy of her character.
she is really headstrong and foolish, I know not whether she would
altogether be a very desirable wife to a man in my situation, who
naturally looks for happiness in the marriage state. If therefore she
only headstrong in such matters as these. In everything else she is as
husband, called out as she entered the library, “Oh! Mr. Bennet, you
Mr. Bennet raised his eyes from his book as she entered, and fixed them
on her face with a calm unconcern which was not in the least altered by
“I have not the pleasure of understanding you,” said he, when she had
“And what am I to do on the occasion? It seems an hopeless business.”
Mrs. Bennet rang the bell, and Miss Elizabeth was summoned to the
“Come here, child,” cried her father as she appeared. “I have sent for
“Very well. We now come to the point. Your mother insists upon your
be a stranger to one of your parents. Your mother will never see you
but Mrs. Bennet, who had persuaded herself that her husband regarded the
First, that you will allow me the free use of my understanding on the
present occasion; and secondly, of my room. I shall be glad to have the
Mrs. Bennet give up the point. She talked to Elizabeth again and again;
could refuse him; and though his pride was hurt, he suffered in no other
way. His regard for her was quite imaginary; and the possibility of her
deserving her mother's reproach prevented his feeling any regret.
While the family were in this confusion, Charlotte Lucas came to spend
the day with them. She was met in the vestibule by Lydia, who, flying to
her, cried in a half whisper, “I am glad you are come, for there is such
Charlotte hardly had time to answer, before they were joined by Kitty,
who came to tell the same news; and no sooner had they entered the
the subject, calling on Miss Lucas for her compassion, and entreating
her to persuade her friend Lizzy to comply with the wishes of all her
Charlotte's reply was spared by the entrance of Jane and Elizabeth.
“Aye, there she comes,” continued Mrs. Bennet, “looking as unconcerned
to maintain you when your father is dead. I shall not be able to keep
you in the library, you know, that I should never speak to you again,
any attempt to reason with her or soothe her would only increase the
irritation. She talked on, therefore, without interruption from any of
them, till they were joined by Mr. Collins, who entered the room with
the girls, “Now, I do insist upon it, that you, all of you, hold
together.”
Elizabeth passed quietly out of the room, Jane and Kitty followed, but
detained first by the civility of Mr. Collins, whose inquiries after
herself and all her family were very minute, and then by a little
curiosity, satisfied herself with walking to the window and pretending
not to hear. In a doleful voice Mrs. Bennet began the projected
displeasure, “to resent the behaviour of your daughter. Resignation
to inevitable evils is the duty of us all; the peculiar duty of a
and I trust I am resigned. Perhaps not the less so from feeling a doubt
when the blessing denied begins to lose somewhat of its value in our
your daughter's favour, without having paid yourself and Mr. Bennet the
liable to error. I have certainly meant well through the whole affair.
consideration for the advantage of all your family, and if my _manner_
Elizabeth had only to suffer from the uncomfortable feelings necessarily
mother. As for the gentleman himself, _his_ feelings were chiefly
to her, and the assiduous attentions which he had been so sensible of
himself were transferred for the rest of the day to Miss Lucas, whose
civility in listening to him was a seasonable relief to them all, and
health. Mr. Collins was also in the same state of angry pride. Elizabeth
not appear in the least affected by it. He was always to have gone on
After breakfast, the girls walked to Meryton to inquire if Mr. Wickham
were returned, and to lament over his absence from the Netherfield ball.
He joined them on their entering the town, and attended them to their
aunt's where his regret and vexation, and the concern of everybody, was
that the necessity of his absence _had_ been self-imposed.
“I found,” said he, “as the time drew near that I had better not meet
Mr. Darcy; that to be in the same room, the same party with him for so
many hours together, might be more than I could bear, and that scenes
She highly approved his forbearance, and they had leisure for a full
discussion of it, and for all the commendation which they civilly
bestowed on each other, as Wickham and another officer walked back with
them to Longbourn, and during the walk he particularly attended to
her. His accompanying them was a double advantage; she felt all the
occasion of introducing him to her father and mother.
Soon after their return, a letter was delivered to Miss Bennet; it came
from Netherfield. The envelope contained a sheet of elegant, little,
herself soon, and putting the letter away, tried to join with her usual
cheerfulness in the general conversation; but Elizabeth felt an anxiety
on the subject which drew off her attention even from Wickham; and no
invited her to follow her up stairs. When they had gained their own room,
Jane, taking out the letter, said:
deal. The whole party have left Netherfield by this time, and are on
their way to town--and without any intention of coming back again. You
She then read the first sentence aloud, which comprised the information
of their having just resolved to follow their brother to town directly,
and of their meaning to dine in Grosvenor Street, where Mr. Hurst had a
house. The next was in these words: “I do not pretend to regret anything
delightful intercourse we have known, and in the meanwhile may
lessen the pain of separation by a very frequent and most unreserved
correspondence. I depend on you for that.” To these highflown
expressions Elizabeth listened with all the insensibility of distrust;
and though the suddenness of their removal surprised her, she saw
nothing in it really to lament; it was not to be supposed that their
absence from Netherfield would prevent Mr. Bingley's being there; and as
to the loss of their society, she was persuaded that Jane must cease to
regard it, in the enjoyment of his.
able to see your friends before they leave the country. But may we not
hope that the period of future happiness to which Miss Bingley looks
forward may arrive earlier than she is aware, and that the delightful
them.”
“Caroline decidedly says that none of the party will return into
“When my brother left us yesterday, he imagined that the business which
are certain it cannot be so, and at the same time convinced that when
determined on following him thither, that he may not be obliged to spend
already there for the winter; I wish that I could hear that you, my
dearest friend, had any intention of making one of the crowd--but of
abound in the gaieties which that season generally brings, and that your
beaux will be so numerous as to prevent your feeling the loss of the
master. But you do not know _all_. I _will_ read you the passage which
“Mr. Darcy is impatient to see his sister; and, to confess the truth,
and the affection she inspires in Louisa and myself is heightened into
something still more interesting, from the hope we dare entertain of
her being hereafter our sister. I do not know whether I ever before
mentioned to you my feelings on this subject; but I will not leave the
country without confiding them, and I trust you will not esteem them
unreasonable. My brother admires her greatly already; he will have
frequent opportunity now of seeing her on the most intimate footing;
her relations all wish the connection as much as his own; and a sister's
capable of engaging any woman's heart. With all these circumstances to
Jane, in indulging the hope of an event which will secure the happiness
Caroline neither expects nor wishes me to be her sister; that she is
perfectly convinced of her brother's indifference; and that if she
suspects the nature of my feelings for him, she means (most kindly!) to
put me on my guard? Can there be any other opinion on the subject?”
“Yes, there can; for mine is totally different. Will you hear it?”
“You shall have it in a few words. Miss Bingley sees that her brother is
to town in hope of keeping him there, and tries to persuade you that he
together can doubt his affection. Miss Bingley, I am sure, cannot. She
Darcy for herself, she would have ordered her wedding clothes. But the
case is this: We are not rich enough or grand enough for them; and she
is the more anxious to get Miss Darcy for her brother, from the notion
that when there has been _one_ intermarriage, she may have less trouble
in achieving a second; in which there is certainly some ingenuity, and
I dare say it would succeed, if Miss de Bourgh were out of the way. But,
tells you her brother greatly admires Miss Darcy, he is in the smallest
representation of all this might make me quite easy. But I know the
“But, my dear sister, can I be happy, even supposing the best, in
deliberation, you find that the misery of disobliging his two sisters is
more than equivalent to the happiness of being his wife, I advise you by
though I should be exceedingly grieved at their disapprobation, I could
“I did not think you would; and that being the case, I cannot consider
The idea of his returning no more Elizabeth treated with the utmost
contempt. It appeared to her merely the suggestion of Caroline's
on the subject, and had soon the pleasure of seeing its happy effect.
though the diffidence of affection sometimes overcame the hope, that
Bingley would return to Netherfield and answer every wish of her heart.
They agreed that Mrs. Bennet should only hear of the departure of the
family, without being alarmed on the score of the gentleman's conduct;
and she bewailed it as exceedingly unlucky that the ladies should happen
to go away just as they were all getting so intimate together. After
lamenting it, however, at some length, she had the consolation that Mr.
Bingley would be soon down again and soon dining at Longbourn, and the
conclusion of all was the comfortable declaration, that though he had
The Bennets were engaged to dine with the Lucases and again during the
chief of the day was Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to Mr. Collins.
that it amply repaid her for the little sacrifice of her time. This was
very amiable, but Charlotte's kindness extended farther than Elizabeth
from any return of Mr. Collins's addresses, by engaging them towards
favourable, that when they parted at night, she would have felt almost
soon. But here she did injustice to the fire and independence of his
character, for it led him to escape out of Longbourn House the next
himself at her feet. He was anxious to avoid the notice of his cousins,
from a conviction that if they saw him depart, they could not fail to
conjecture his design, and he was not willing to have the attempt known
he was comparatively diffident since the adventure of Wednesday.
His reception, however, was of the most flattering kind. Miss Lucas
perceived him from an upper window as he walked towards the house, and
instantly set out to meet him accidentally in the lane. But little had
she dared to hope that so much love and eloquence awaited her there.
everything was settled between them to the satisfaction of both; and as
they entered the house he earnestly entreated her to name the day that
was to make him the happiest of men; and though such a solicitation must
be waived for the present, the lady felt no inclination to trifle with
continuance; and Miss Lucas, who accepted him solely from the pure
Sir William and Lady Lucas were speedily applied to for their consent;
circumstances made it a most eligible match for their daughter, to whom
they could give little fortune; and his prospects of future wealth were
interest than the matter had ever excited before, how many years longer
opinion, that whenever Mr. Collins should be in possession of the
should make their appearance at St. James's. The whole family, in short,
were properly overjoyed on the occasion. The younger girls formed hopes
of _coming out_ a year or two sooner than they might otherwise have
done; and the boys were relieved from their apprehension of Charlotte's
in general satisfactory. Mr. Collins, to be sure, was neither sensible
either of men or matrimony, marriage had always been her object; it was
the only provision for well-educated young women of small fortune,
and however uncertain of giving happiness, must be their pleasantest
the age of twenty-seven, without having ever been handsome, she felt all
the good luck of it. The least agreeable circumstance in the business
was the surprise it must occasion to Elizabeth Bennet, whose friendship
she valued beyond that of any other person. Elizabeth would wonder,
to give her the information herself, and therefore charged Mr. Collins,
passed before any of the family. A promise of secrecy was of course very
dutifully given, but it could not be kept without difficulty; for the
at the same time exercising great self-denial, for he was longing to
As he was to begin his journey too early on the morrow to see any of the
family, the ceremony of leave-taking was performed when the ladies moved
for the night; and Mrs. Bennet, with great politeness and cordiality,
said how happy they should be to see him at Longbourn again, whenever
his engagements might allow him to visit them.
“But is there not danger of Lady Catherine's disapprobation here, my
good sir? You had better neglect your relations than run the risk of
“You cannot be too much upon your guard. Risk anything rather than her
from me a letter of thanks for this, and for every other mark of your
take the liberty of wishing them health and happiness, not excepting my
With proper civilities the ladies then withdrew; all of them equally
She rated his abilities much higher than any of the others; there was
agreeable companion. But on the following morning, every hope of this
private conference with Elizabeth related the event of the day before.
friend had once occurred to Elizabeth within the last day or two; but
consequently so great as to overcome at first the bounds of decorum, and
for it, was able to assure with tolerable firmness that the prospect of
their relationship was highly grateful to her, and that she wished her
entering the marriage state.”
they returned to the rest of the family. Charlotte did not stay much
longer, and Elizabeth was then left to reflect on what she had heard.
It was a long time before she became at all reconciled to the idea of so
feeling to worldly advantage. Charlotte the wife of Mr. Collins was a
most humiliating picture! And to the pang of a friend disgracing herself
and sunk in her esteem, was added the distressing conviction that it
was impossible for that friend to be tolerably happy in the lot she had
Elizabeth was sitting with her mother and sisters, reflecting on what
she had heard, and doubting whether she was authorised to mention
announce her engagement to the family. With many compliments to them,
and much self-gratulation on the prospect of a connection between the
houses, he unfolded the matter--to an audience not merely wondering, but
Nothing less than the complaisance of a courtier could have borne
him through it all; and though he begged leave to be positive as to the
truth of his information, he listened to all their impertinence with the
endeavoured to put a stop to the exclamations of her mother and sisters
by the earnestness of her congratulations to Sir William, in which she
was readily joined by Jane, and by making a variety of remarks on the
happiness that might be expected from the match, the excellent character
of Mr. Collins, and the convenient distance of Hunsford from London.
Sir William remained; but no sooner had he left them than her feelings
found a rapid vent. In the first place, she persisted in disbelieving
the whole of the matter; secondly, she was very sure that Mr. Collins
had been taken in; thirdly, she trusted that they would never be
happy together; and fourthly, that the match might be broken off. Two
inferences, however, were plainly deduced from the whole: one, that
Elizabeth was the real cause of the mischief; and the other that she
herself had been barbarously misused by them all; and on these two
points she principally dwelt during the rest of the day. Nothing could
could at all forgive their daughter.
Mr. Bennet's emotions were much more tranquil on the occasion, and such
Jane confessed herself a little surprised at the match; but she said
less of her astonishment than of her earnest desire for their happiness;
clergyman; and it affected them in no other way than as a piece of news
on Mrs. Bennet the comfort of having a daughter well married; and she
called at Longbourn rather oftener than usual to say how happy she was,
Between Elizabeth and Charlotte there was a restraint which kept them
mutually silent on the subject; and Elizabeth felt persuaded that
no real confidence could ever subsist between them again. Her
the days till she might reasonably hope to hear again. The promised
their father, and written with all the solemnity of gratitude which a
twelvemonth's abode in the family might have prompted. After discharging
his conscience on that head, he proceeded to inform them, with many
rapturous expressions, of his happiness in having obtained the affection
of their amiable neighbour, Miss Lucas, and then explained that it was
merely with the view of enjoying her society that he had been so ready
to close with their kind wish of seeing him again at Longbourn, whither
he hoped to be able to return on Monday fortnight; for Lady Catherine,
the happiest of men.
pleasure to Mrs. Bennet. On the contrary, she was as much disposed to
and exceedingly troublesome. She hated having visitors in the house
while her health was so indifferent, and lovers were of all people the
most disagreeable. Such were the gentle murmurs of Mrs. Bennet, and
they gave way only to the greater distress of Mr. Bingley's continued
Neither Jane nor Elizabeth were comfortable on this subject. Day after
day passed away without bringing any other tidings of him than the
Netherfield the whole winter; a report which highly incensed Mrs.
dishonorable to the stability of her lover, she could not prevent its
and of his overpowering friend, assisted by the attractions of Miss
Darcy and the amusements of London might be too much, she feared, for
the strength of his attachment.
concealing, and between herself and Elizabeth, therefore, the subject
was never alluded to. But as no such delicacy restrained her mother,
all Jane's steady mildness to bear these attacks with tolerable
and luckily for the others, the business of love-making relieved them
to make an apology for his absence before the family went to bed.
anything concerning the match threw her into an agony of ill-humour,
them, she concluded her to be anticipating the hour of possession; and
they were talking of the Longbourn estate, and resolving to turn herself
and her daughters out of the house, as soon as Mr. Bennet were dead. She
better things. Let us flatter ourselves that I may be the survivor.”
This was not very consoling to Mrs. Bennet, and therefore, instead of
“I cannot bear to think that they should have all this estate. If it was
not for the entail, I should not mind it.”
“I never can be thankful, Mr. Bennet, for anything about the entail. How
anyone could have the conscience to entail away an estate from one's own
daughters, I cannot understand; and all for the sake of Mr. Collins too!
sentence conveyed the assurance of their being all settled in London for
the winter, and concluded with her brother's regret at not having had
the country.
Hope was over, entirely over; and when Jane could attend to the rest
of the letter, she found little, except the professed affection of the
the chief of it. Her many attractions were again dwelt on, and Caroline
boasted joyfully of their increasing intimacy, and ventured to predict
the accomplishment of the wishes which had been unfolded in her former
letter. She wrote also with great pleasure of her brother's being an
the latter with regard to new furniture.
Elizabeth, to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this,
for her sister, and resentment against all others. To Caroline's
assertion of her brother's being partial to Miss Darcy she paid no
of temper, that want of proper resolution, which now made him the slave
to the caprice of their inclination. Had his own happiness, however,
been the only sacrifice, he might have been allowed to sport with it in
could think of nothing else; and yet whether Bingley's regard had really
died away, or were suppressed by his friends' interference; whether
he had been aware of Jane's attachment, or whether it had escaped his
observation; whatever were the case, though her opinion of him must be
materially affected by the difference, her sister's situation remained
the same, her peace equally wounded.
Elizabeth; but at last, on Mrs. Bennet's leaving them together, after a
longer irritation than usual about Netherfield and its master, she could
“Oh, that my dear mother had more command over herself! She can have no
idea of the pain she gives me by her continual reflections on him. But
no reason. He may live in my memory as the most amiable man of my
acquaintance, but that is all. I have nothing either to hope or fear,
little time, therefore--I shall certainly try to get the better.”
the praise on her sister's warm affection.
“Nay,” said Elizabeth, “this is not fair. _You_ wish to think all the
of the world, the more am I dissatisfied with it; and every day confirms
my belief of the inconsistency of all human characters, and of the
little dependence that can be placed on the appearance of merit or
sense. I have met with two instances lately, one I will not mention; the
other is Charlotte's marriage. It is unaccountable! In every view it is
“My dear Lizzy, do not give way to such feelings as these. They will
I do; and you must feel, as well as I do, that the woman who married him
it is Charlotte Lucas. You shall not, for the sake of one individual,
change the meaning of principle and integrity, nor endeavour to persuade
Jane; “and I hope you will be convinced of it by seeing them happy
together. But enough of this. You alluded to something else. You
“And men take care that they should.”
“If it is designedly done, they cannot be justified; but I have no idea
of there being so much design in the world as some persons imagine.”
 said Elizabeth; “but without scheming to do wrong, or to make others
unhappy, there may be error, and there may be misery. Thoughtlessness,
want of attention to other people's feelings, and want of resolution,
will do the business.”
“And do you impute it to either of those?”
“Yes; to the last. But if I go on, I shall displease you by saying what
“You persist, then, in supposing his sisters influence him?”
“I cannot believe it. Why should they try to influence him? They can
only wish his happiness; and if he is attached to me, no other woman can
happiness; they may wish his increase of wealth and consequence; they
may wish him to marry a girl who has all the importance of money, great
“Beyond a doubt, they _do_ wish him to choose Miss Darcy,” replied Jane;
known her much longer than they have known me; no wonder if they love
her better. But, whatever may be their own wishes, it is very unlikely
they should have opposed their brother's. What sister would think
herself at liberty to do it, unless there were something very
objectionable? If they believed him attached to me, they would not try
to part us; if he were so, they could not succeed. By supposing such an
unhappy. Do not distress me by the idea. I am not ashamed of having been
the best light, in the light in which it may be understood.”
name was scarcely ever mentioned between them.
for it clearly, there was little chance of her ever considering it with
did not believe herself, that his attentions to Jane had been merely the
no more; but though the probability of the statement was admitted at
the time, she had the same story to repeat every day. Mrs. Bennet's best
comfort was that Mr. Bingley must be down again in the summer.
Mr. Bennet treated the matter differently. “So, Lizzy,” said he one day,
being married, a girl likes to be crossed a little in love now and then.
Meryton to disappoint all the young ladies in the country. Let Wickham
that kind may befall you, you have an affectionate mother who will make
the most of it.”
Mr. Wickham's society was of material service in dispelling the gloom
which the late perverse occurrences had thrown on many of the Longbourn
family. They saw him often, and to his other recommendations was now
pleased to know how much they had always disliked Mr. Darcy before they
had known anything of the matter.
Miss Bennet was the only creature who could suppose there might be
any extenuating circumstances in the case, unknown to the society
allowances, and urged the possibility of mistakes--but by everybody else
Mr. Darcy was condemned as the worst of men.
Mr. Collins was called from his amiable Charlotte by the arrival of
side, by preparations for the reception of his bride; as he had reason
to hope, that shortly after his return into Hertfordshire, the day would
be fixed that was to make him the happiest of men. He took leave of his
cousins health and happiness again, and promised their father another
On the following Monday, Mrs. Bennet had the pleasure of receiving
her brother and his wife, who came as usual to spend the Christmas
superior to his sister, as well by nature as education. The Netherfield
woman, and a great favourite with all her Longbourn nieces. Between the
two eldest and herself especially, there subsisted a particular regard.
distribute her presents and describe the newest fashions. When this was
girls had been upon the point of marriage, and after all there was
a daughter married before I have, and that the Longbourn estate is just
sister. They are all for what they can get. I am sorry to say it of
them, but so it is. It makes me very nervous and poorly, to be thwarted
so in my own family, and to have neighbours who think of themselves
before anybody else. However, your coming just at this time is the
Mrs. Gardiner, to whom the chief of this news had been given before,
in the course of Jane and Elizabeth's correspondence with her, made her
sister a slight answer, and, in compassion to her nieces, turned the
When alone with Elizabeth afterwards, she spoke more on the subject. “It
sorry it went off. But these things happen so often! A young man, such
for a few weeks, and when accident separates them, so easily forgets
her, that these sort of inconsistencies are very frequent.”
happen that the interference of friends will persuade a young man of
inattentive to other people, and wholly engrossed by her. Every time
they met, it was more decided and remarkable. At his own ball he
offended two or three young ladies, by not asking them to dance; and I
spoke to him twice myself, without receiving an answer. Could there be
finer symptoms? Is not general incivility the very essence of love?”
out so little, that it is very improbable that they should meet at all,
“And _that_ is quite impossible; for he is now in the custody of his
“So much the better. I hope they will not meet at all. But does not Jane
“She will drop the acquaintance entirely.”
But in spite of the certainty in which Elizabeth affected to place this
point, as well as the still more interesting one of Bingley's being
withheld from seeing Jane, she felt a solicitude on the subject which
his affection might be reanimated, and the influence of his friends
successfully combated by the more natural influence of Jane's
Miss Bennet accepted her aunt's invitation with pleasure; and the
Bingleys were no otherwise in her thoughts at the same time, than as she
hoped by Caroline's not living in the same house with her brother,
The Gardiners stayed a week at Longbourn; and what with the Phillipses,
the Lucases, and the officers, there was not a day without its
engagement. Mrs. Bennet had so carefully provided for the entertainment
of her brother and sister, that they did not once sit down to a family
dinner. When the engagement was for home, some of the officers always
on these occasions, Mrs. Gardiner, rendered suspicious by Elizabeth's
warm commendation, narrowly observed them both. Without supposing them,
from what she saw, to be very seriously in love, their preference
of each other was plain enough to make her a little uneasy; and
she resolved to speak to Elizabeth on the subject before she left
Hertfordshire, and represent to her the imprudence of encouraging such
part of Derbyshire to which he belonged. They had, therefore, many
acquaintances in common; and though Wickham had been little there since
the death of Darcy's father, it was yet in his power to give her fresher
intelligence of her former friends than she had been in the way of
Mrs. Gardiner had seen Pemberley, and known the late Mr. Darcy by
of discourse. In comparing her recollection of Pemberley with the minute
praise on the character of its late possessor, she was delighting both
him and herself. On being made acquainted with the present Mr. Darcy's
on the first favourable opportunity of speaking to her alone; after
you are warned against it; and, therefore, I am not afraid of speaking
yourself or endeavour to involve him in an affection which the want
_him_; he is a most interesting young man; and if he had the fortune he
expect you to use it. Your father would depend on _your_ resolution and
good conduct, I am sure. You must not disappoint your father.”
“Well, then, you need not be under any alarm. I will take care of
the most agreeable man I ever saw--and if he becomes really attached to
me--I believe it will be better that he should not. I see the imprudence
of it. Oh! _that_ abominable Mr. Darcy! My father's opinion of me does
me the greatest honour, and I should be miserable to forfeit it. My
father, however, is partial to Mr. Wickham. In short, my dear aunt, I
should be very sorry to be the means of making any of you unhappy; but
since we see every day that where there is affection, young people
engagements with each other, how can I promise to be wiser than so many
would be wisdom to resist? All that I can promise you, therefore, is not
often. At least, you should not _remind_ your mother of inviting him.”
“As I did the other day,” said Elizabeth with a conscious smile: “very
so frequently invited this week. You know my mother's ideas as to the
honour, I will try to do what I think to be the wisest; and now I hope
the kindness of her hints, they parted; a wonderful instance of advice
by the Gardiners and Jane; but as he took up his abode with the Lucases,
she “_wished_ they might be happy.” Thursday was to be the wedding day,
rose to take leave, Elizabeth, ashamed of her mother's ungracious and
out of the room. As they went downstairs together, Charlotte said:
“And I have another favour to ask you. Will you come and see me?”
“I am not likely to leave Kent for some time. Promise me, therefore, to
Elizabeth could not refuse, though she foresaw little pleasure in the
“My father and Maria are coming to me in March,” added Charlotte, “and I
hope you will consent to be of the party. Indeed, Eliza, you will be as
welcome as either of them.”
The wedding took place; the bride and bridegroom set off for Kent from
the church door, and everybody had as much to say, or to hear, on
the subject as usual. Elizabeth soon heard from her friend; and their
address her without feeling that all the comfort of intimacy was over,
and though determined not to slacken as a correspondent, it was for the
sake of what had been, rather than what was. Charlotte's first letters
were received with a good deal of eagerness; there could not but be
like Lady Catherine, and how happy she would dare pronounce herself to
be; though, when the letters were read, Elizabeth felt that Charlotte
roads, were all to her taste, and Lady Catherine's behaviour was most
for her own visit there to know the rest.
Jane had already written a few lines to her sister to announce their
would be in her power to say something of the Bingleys.
generally is. Jane had been a week in town without either seeing or
“My aunt,” she continued, “is going to-morrow into that part of the
town, and I shall take the opportunity of calling in Grosvenor Street.”
She wrote again when the visit was paid, and she had seen Miss Bingley.
to London. I was right, therefore, my last letter had never reached
her. I inquired after their brother, of course. He was well, but so much
engaged with Mr. Darcy that they scarcely ever saw him. I found that
see them soon here.”
for a fortnight, and inventing every evening a fresh excuse for her, the
visitor did at last appear; but the shortness of her stay, and yet more,
the alteration of her manner would allow Jane to deceive herself no
though the event has proved you right, do not think me obstinate if I
wishing to be intimate with me; but if the same circumstances were to
receive in the meantime. When she did come, it was very evident that
perfectly resolved to continue the acquaintance no longer. I pity,
wrong, and because I am very sure that anxiety for her brother is the
cause of it. I need not explain myself farther; and though _we_ know
be almost tempted to say that there is a strong appearance of duplicity
and think only of what will make me happy--your affection, and the
soon. Miss Bingley said something of his never returning to Netherfield
again, of giving up the house, but not with any certainty. We had better
from our friends at Hunsford. Pray go to see them, with Sir William and
Maria. I am sure you will be very comfortable there.--Yours, etc.”
considered that Jane would no longer be duped, by the sister at least.
All expectation from the brother was now absolutely over. She would not
had such to send as might rather give contentment to her aunt than to
he was the admirer of some one else. Elizabeth was watchful enough to
permitted it. The sudden acquisition of ten thousand pounds was the most
remarkable charm of the young lady to whom he was now rendering himself
Nothing, on the contrary, could be more natural; and while able to
All this was acknowledged to Mrs. Gardiner; and after relating the
towards _him_; they are even impartial towards Miss King. I cannot find
out that I hate her at all, or that I am in the least unwilling to
his defection much more to heart than I do. They are young in the
ways of the world, and not yet open to the mortifying conviction that
handsome young men must have something to live on as well as the plain.”
With no greater events than these in the Longbourn family, and otherwise
diversified by little beyond the walks to Meryton, sometimes dirty and
going thither; but Charlotte, she soon found, was depending on the plan
was novelty in the scheme, and as, with such a mother and such
a peep at Jane; and, in short, as the time drew near, she would have
of spending a night in London was added in time, and the plan became
The only pain was in leaving her father, who would certainly miss her,
and who, when it came to the point, so little liked her going, that he
Elizabeth had been the first to excite and to deserve his attention, the
first to listen and to pity, the first to be admired; and in his manner
what she was to expect in Lady Catherine de Bourgh, and trusting their
opinion of her--their opinion of everybody--would always coincide, there
whether married or single, he must always be her model of the amiable
Her fellow-travellers the next day were not of a kind to make her
delight as the rattle of the chaise. Elizabeth loved absurdities, but
the wonders of his presentation and knighthood; and his civilities were
It was a journey of only twenty-four miles, and they began it so early
as to be in Gracechurch Street by noon. As they drove to Mr. Gardiner's
door, Jane was at a drawing-room window watching their arrival; when
they entered the passage she was there to welcome them, and Elizabeth,
lovely as ever. On the stairs were a troop of little boys and girls,
whose eagerness for their cousin's appearance would not allow them to
wait in the drawing-room, and whose shyness, as they had not seen
her for a twelvemonth, prevented their coming lower. All was joy and
kindness. The day passed most pleasantly away; the morning in bustle and
shopping, and the evening at one of the theatres.
Elizabeth then contrived to sit by her aunt. Their first object was her
spirits, there were periods of dejection. It was reasonable, however,
to hope that they would not continue long. Mrs. Gardiner gave her the
herself, which proved that the former had, from her heart, given up the
Mrs. Gardiner then rallied her niece on Wickham's desertion, and
“Pray, my dear aunt, what is the difference in matrimonial affairs,
between the mercenary and the prudent motive? Where does discretion end,
“But he paid her not the smallest attention till her grandfather's death
affections because I had no money, what occasion could there be for
“But there seems an indelicacy in directing his attentions towards her
decorums which other people may observe. If _she_ does not object to it,
Derbyshire; and their intimate friends who live in Hertfordshire are not
much better. I am sick of them all. Thank Heaven! I am going to-morrow
neither manner nor sense to recommend him. Stupid men are the only ones
Before they were separated by the conclusion of the play, she had the
a tour of pleasure which they proposed taking in the summer.
“but, perhaps, to the Lakes.”
acceptance of the invitation was most ready and grateful. “Oh, my dear,
we shall spend! And when we _do_ return, it shall not be like other
Lakes, mountains, and rivers shall not be jumbled together in our
first effusions be less insupportable than those of the generality of
Every object in the next day's journey was new and interesting to
and the prospect of her northern tour was a constant source of delight.
When they left the high road for the lane to Hunsford, every eye was in
search of the Parsonage, and every turning expected to bring it in view.
The palings of Rosings Park was their boundary on one side. Elizabeth
smiled at the recollection of all that she had heard of its inhabitants.
At length the Parsonage was discernible. The garden sloping to the
road, the house standing in it, the green pales, and the laurel hedge,
everything declared they were arriving. Mr. Collins and Charlotte
appeared at the door, and the carriage stopped at the small gate which
led by a short gravel walk to the house, amidst the nods and smiles of
the whole party. In a moment they were all out of the chaise, rejoicing
at the sight of each other. Mrs. Collins welcomed her friend with the
minutes at the gate to hear and satisfy his inquiries after all her
family. They were then, with no other delay than his pointing out the
neatness of the entrance, taken into the house; and as soon as they
were in the parlour, he welcomed them a second time, with ostentatious
in fancying that in displaying the good proportion of the room, its
gratify him by any sigh of repentance, and rather looked with wonder at
admire every article of furniture in the room, from the sideboard to
the fender, to give an account of their journey, and of all that had
happened in London, Mr. Collins invited them to take a stroll in the
garden, which was large and well laid out, and to the cultivation of
respectable pleasures; and Elizabeth admired the command of countenance
with which Charlotte talked of the healthfulness of the exercise, and
owned she encouraged it as much as possible. Here, leading the way
through every walk and cross walk, and scarcely allowing them an
interval to utter the praises he asked for, every view was pointed out
with a minuteness which left beauty entirely behind. He could number the
fields in every direction, and could tell how many trees there were in
the most distant clump. But of all the views which his garden, or which
the country or kingdom could boast, none were to be compared with the
prospect of Rosings, afforded by an opening in the trees that bordered
the park nearly opposite the front of his house. It was a handsome
From his garden, Mr. Collins would have led them round his two meadows;
but the ladies, not having shoes to encounter the remains of a white
took her sister and friend over the house, extremely well pleased,
probably, to have the opportunity of showing it without her husband's
help. It was rather small, but well built and convenient; and everything
Elizabeth gave Charlotte all the credit. When Mr. Collins could be
forgotten, there was really an air of great comfort throughout, and by
She had already learnt that Lady Catherine was still in the country. It
was spoken of again while they were at dinner, when Mr. Collins joining
“Yes, Miss Elizabeth, you will have the honour of seeing Lady Catherine
de Bourgh on the ensuing Sunday at church, and I need not say you will
“Lady Catherine is a very respectable, sensible woman indeed,” added
“Very true, my dear, that is exactly what I say. She is the sort of
Elizabeth, in the solitude of her chamber, had to meditate upon
would pass, the quiet tenor of their usual employments, the vexatious
interruptions of Mr. Collins, and the gaieties of their intercourse with
About the middle of the next day, as she was in her room getting ready
for a walk, a sudden noise below seemed to speak the whole house in
the door and met Maria in the landing place, who, breathless with
“Oh, my dear Eliza! pray make haste and come into the dining-room, for
there is such a sight to be seen! I will not tell you what it is. Make
and down they ran into the dining-room, which fronted the lane, in
quest of this wonder; It was two ladies stopping in a low phaeton at the
“And is this all?” cried Elizabeth. “I expected at least that the pigs
were got into the garden, and here is nothing but Lady Catherine and her
“La! my dear,” said Maria, quite shocked at the mistake, “it is not
Lady Catherine. The old lady is Mrs. Jenkinson, who lives with them;
the other is Miss de Bourgh. Only look at her. She is quite a little
“Oh, Charlotte says she hardly ever does. It is the greatest of favours
“I like her appearance,” said Elizabeth, struck with other ideas. “She
Mr. Collins and Charlotte were both standing at the gate in conversation
with the ladies; and Sir William, to Elizabeth's high diversion, was
stationed in the doorway, in earnest contemplation of the greatness
At length there was nothing more to be said; the ladies drove on, and
the others returned into the house. Mr. Collins no sooner saw the two
girls than he began to congratulate them on their good fortune, which
Charlotte explained by letting them know that the whole party was asked
to dine at Rosings the next day.
The power of displaying the grandeur of his patroness to his wondering
visitors, and of letting them see her civility towards himself and his
Catherine's condescension, as he knew not how to admire enough.
her ladyship's asking us on Sunday to drink tea and spend the evening at
Rosings. I rather expected, from my knowledge of her affability, that it
could have imagined that we should receive an invitation to dine there
(an invitation, moreover, including the whole party) so immediately
“I am the less surprised at what has happened,” replied Sir William,
“from that knowledge of what the manners of the great really are, which
my situation in life has allowed me to acquire. About the court, such
Scarcely anything was talked of the whole day or next morning but their
visit to Rosings. Mr. Collins was carefully instructing them in what
they were to expect, that the sight of such rooms, so many servants, and
so splendid a dinner, might not wholly overpower them.
When the ladies were separating for the toilette, he said to Elizabeth--
Catherine is far from requiring that elegance of dress in us which
whatever of your clothes is superior to the rest--there is no occasion
for anything more. Lady Catherine will not think the worse of you
for being simply dressed. She likes to have the distinction of rank
While they were dressing, he came two or three times to their different
doors, to recommend their being quick, as Lady Catherine very much
introduction at Rosings with as much apprehension as her father had done
As the weather was fine, they had a pleasant walk of about half a
mile across the park. Every park has its beauty and its prospects; and
raptures as Mr. Collins expected the scene to inspire, and was but
slightly affected by his enumeration of the windows in front of the
house, and his relation of what the glazing altogether had originally
When they ascended the steps to the hall, Maria's alarm was every
Catherine that spoke her awful from any extraordinary talents or
miraculous virtue, and the mere stateliness of money or rank she thought
From the entrance-hall, of which Mr. Collins pointed out, with a
rapturous air, the fine proportion and the finished ornaments, they
followed the servants through an ante-chamber, to the room where Lady
Catherine, her daughter, and Mrs. Jenkinson were sitting. Her ladyship,
with great condescension, arose to receive them; and as Mrs. Collins had
settled it with her husband that the office of introduction should
awed by the grandeur surrounding him, that he had but just courage
and his daughter, frightened almost out of her senses, sat on the edge
quite equal to the scene, and could observe the three ladies before her
composedly. Lady Catherine was a tall, large woman, with strongly-marked
conciliating, nor was her manner of receiving them such as to make her
visitors forget their inferior rank. She was not rendered formidable by
Elizabeth's mind; and from the observation of the day altogether, she
believed Lady Catherine to be exactly what he represented.
When, after examining the mother, in whose countenance and deportment
she soon found some resemblance of Mr. Darcy, she turned her eyes on the
being so thin and so small. There was neither in figure nor face any
likeness between the ladies. Miss de Bourgh was pale and sickly; her
there was nothing remarkable, and who was entirely engaged in listening
to what she said, and placing a screen in the proper direction before
After sitting a few minutes, they were all sent to one of the windows to
admire the view, Mr. Collins attending them to point out its beauties,
and Lady Catherine kindly informing them that it was much better worth
looking at in the summer.
The dinner was exceedingly handsome, and there were all the servants and
all the articles of plate which Mr. Collins had promised; and, as he had
likewise foretold, he took his seat at the bottom of the table, by her
alacrity; and every dish was commended, first by him and then by Sir
said, in a manner which Elizabeth wondered Lady Catherine could bear.
But Lady Catherine seemed gratified by their excessive admiration, and
gave most gracious smiles, especially when any dish on the table proved
a novelty to them. The party did not supply much conversation. Elizabeth
was ready to speak whenever there was an opening, but she was seated
between Charlotte and Miss de Bourgh--the former of whom was engaged in
listening to Lady Catherine, and the latter said not a word to her all
Miss de Bourgh ate, pressing her to try some other dish, and fearing
she was indisposed. Maria thought speaking out of the question, and the
When the ladies returned to the drawing-room, there was little to
be done but to hear Lady Catherine talk, which she did without any
to the management of them all; told her how everything ought to be
regulated in so small a family as hers, and instructed her as to the
occasion of dictating to others. In the intervals of her discourse
Elizabeth, but especially to the latter, of whose connections she knew
the least, and who she observed to Mrs. Collins was a very genteel,
she had, whether they were older or younger than herself, whether any of
them were likely to be married, whether they were handsome, where they
had been educated, what carriage her father kept, and what had been
her mother's maiden name? Elizabeth felt all the impertinence of
her questions but answered them very composedly. Lady Catherine then
“Your father's estate is entailed on Mr. Collins, I think. For your
sake,” turning to Charlotte, “I am glad of it; but otherwise I see no
occasion for entailing estates from the female line. It was not thought
“Oh! then--some time or other we shall be happy to hear you. Our
“One of them does.”
Webbs all play, and their father has not so good an income as yours. Do
“That is very strange. But I suppose you had no opportunity. Your mother
should have taken you to town every spring for the benefit of masters.”
“My mother would have had no objection, but my father hates London.”
without a governess! I never heard of such a thing. Your mother must
the case.
wished to learn never wanted the means. We were always encouraged to
read, and had all the masters that were necessary. Those who chose to be
known your mother, I should have advised her most strenuously to engage
wonderful how many families I have been the means of supplying in that
it was but the other day that I recommended another young person,
who was merely accidentally mentioned to me, and the family are quite
Catherine,' said she, 'you have given me a treasure.' Are any of your
“All! What, all five out at once? Very odd! And you only the second. The
younger ones out before the elder ones are married! Your younger sisters
younger sisters, that they should not have their share of society and
amusement, because the elder may not have the means or inclination to
marry early. The last-born has as good a right to the pleasures of youth
as the first. And to be kept back on _such_ a motive! I think it would
Lady Catherine seemed quite astonished at not receiving a direct answer;
and Elizabeth suspected herself to be the first creature who had ever
“You cannot be more than twenty, I am sure, therefore you need not
When the gentlemen had joined them, and tea was over, the card-tables
were placed. Lady Catherine, Sir William, and Mr. and Mrs. Collins sat
down to quadrille; and as Miss de Bourgh chose to play at cassino, the
two girls had the honour of assisting Mrs. Jenkinson to make up her
uttered that did not relate to the game, except when Mrs. Jenkinson
having too much or too little light. A great deal more passed at the
other table. Lady Catherine was generally speaking--stating the mistakes
of the three others, or relating some anecdote of herself. Mr. Collins
When Lady Catherine and her daughter had played as long as they chose,
the tables were broken up, the carriage was offered to Mrs. Collins,
gratefully accepted and immediately ordered. The party then gathered
round the fire to hear Lady Catherine determine what weather they were
to have on the morrow. From these instructions they were summoned by
the arrival of the coach; and with many speeches of thankfulness on Mr.
Collins's side and as many bows on Sir William's they departed. As soon
as they had driven from the door, Elizabeth was called on by her cousin
often met with. While Sir William was with them, Mr. Collins devoted his
morning to driving him out in his gig, and showing him the country; but
when he went away, the whole family returned to their usual employments,
and Elizabeth was thankful to find that they did not see more of her
cousin by the alteration, for the chief of the time between breakfast
and dinner was now passed by him either at work in the garden or in
reading and writing, and looking out of the window in his own book-room,
which fronted the road. The room in which the ladies sat was backwards.
Elizabeth had at first rather wondered that Charlotte should not prefer
the dining-parlour for common use; it was a better sized room, and had a
much less in his own apartment, had they sat in one equally lively; and
she gave Charlotte credit for the arrangement.
From the drawing-room they could distinguish nothing in the lane, and
were indebted to Mr. Collins for the knowledge of what carriages went
which he never failed coming to inform them of, though it happened
almost every day. She not unfrequently stopped at the Parsonage, and
and till Elizabeth recollected that there might be other family livings
to be disposed of, she could not understand the sacrifice of so many
hours. Now and then they were honoured with a call from her ladyship,
and nothing escaped her observation that was passing in the room during
these visits. She examined into their employments, looked at their work,
and advised them to do it differently; found fault with the arrangement
of the furniture; or detected the housemaid in negligence; and if she
accepted any refreshment, seemed to do it only for the sake of finding
commission of the peace of the county, she was a most active magistrate
in her own parish, the minutest concerns of which were carried to her
by Mr. Collins; and whenever any of the cottagers were disposed to
be quarrelsome, discontented, or too poor, she sallied forth into the
village to settle their differences, silence their complaints, and scold
them into harmony and plenty.
and, allowing for the loss of Sir William, and there being only one
card-table in the evening, every such entertainment was the counterpart
of the first. Their other engagements were few, as the style of living
in the neighbourhood in general was beyond Mr. Collins's reach. This,
however, was no evil to Elizabeth, and upon the whole she spent her time
comfortably enough; there were half-hours of pleasant conversation with
Charlotte, and the weather was so fine for the time of year that she had
frequently went while the others were calling on Lady Catherine, was
along the open grove which edged that side of the park, where there was
where she felt beyond the reach of Lady Catherine's curiosity.
In this quiet way, the first fortnight of her visit soon passed away.
Easter was approaching, and the week preceding it was to bring an
addition to the family at Rosings, which in so small a circle must be
expected there in the course of a few weeks, and though there were not
furnish one comparatively new to look at in their Rosings parties, and
destined by Lady Catherine, who talked of his coming with the greatest
satisfaction, spoke of him in terms of the highest admiration, and
His arrival was soon known at the Parsonage; for Mr. Collins was walking
the whole morning within view of the lodges opening into Hunsford Lane,
in order to have the earliest assurance of it, and after making his
bow as the carriage turned into the Park, hurried home with the great
intelligence. On the following morning he hastened to Rosings to pay his
respects. There were two nephews of Lady Catherine to require them, for
Mr. Darcy had brought with him a Colonel Fitzwilliam, the younger son of
his uncle Lord ----, and, to the great surprise of all the party, when
Mr. Collins returned, the gentlemen accompanied him. Charlotte had seen
them from her husband's room, crossing the road, and immediately running
into the other, told the girls what an honour they might expect, adding:
Elizabeth had scarcely time to disclaim all right to the compliment,
before their approach was announced by the door-bell, and shortly
afterwards the three gentlemen entered the room. Colonel Fitzwilliam,
who led the way, was about thirty, not handsome, but in person and
address most truly the gentleman. Mr. Darcy looked just as he had been
Colonel Fitzwilliam entered into conversation directly with the
his cousin, after having addressed a slight observation on the house and
Elizabeth after the health of her family. She answered him in the usual
“My eldest sister has been in town these three months. Have you never
happened to see her there?”
whether he would betray any consciousness of what had passed between
the Bingleys and Jane, and she thought he looked a little confused as he
subject was pursued no farther, and the gentlemen soon afterwards went
Colonel Fitzwilliam's manners were very much admired at the Parsonage,
and the ladies all felt that he must add considerably to the pleasures
of their engagements at Rosings. It was some days, however, before they
received any invitation thither--for while there were visitors in the
house, they could not be necessary; and it was not till Easter-day,
almost a week after the gentlemen's arrival, that they were honoured by
such an attention, and then they were merely asked on leaving church to
come there in the evening. For the last week they had seen very little
of Lady Catherine or her daughter. Colonel Fitzwilliam had called at the
Parsonage more than once during the time, but Mr. Darcy they had seen
The invitation was accepted of course, and at a proper hour they joined
the party in Lady Catherine's drawing-room. Her ladyship received
them civilly, but it was plain that their company was by no means so
almost engrossed by her nephews, speaking to them, especially to Darcy,
much more than to any other person in the room.
Colonel Fitzwilliam seemed really glad to see them; anything was a
well entertained in that room before; and they conversed with so much
spirit and flow, as to draw the attention of Lady Catherine herself,
towards them with a look of curiosity; and that her ladyship, after a
while, shared the feeling, was more openly acknowledged, for she did not
must have my share in the conversation if you are speaking of music.
Catherine; “and pray tell her from me, that she cannot expect to excel
“So much the better. It cannot be done too much; and when I next write
her, to come to Rosings every day, and play on the pianoforte in Mrs.
of the house.”
promised to play to him; and she sat down directly to the instrument. He
drew a chair near her. Lady Catherine listened to half a song, and then
talked, as before, to her other nephew; till the latter walked away
from her, and making with his usual deliberation towards the pianoforte
stationed himself so as to command a full view of the fair performer's
countenance. Elizabeth saw what he was doing, and at the first
is a stubbornness about me that never can bear to be frightened at the
will of others. My courage always rises at every attempt to intimidate
had the pleasure of your acquaintance long enough to know that you find
of the world where I had hoped to pass myself off with some degree of
“You shall hear then--but prepare yourself for something very dreadful.
partner. Mr. Darcy, you cannot deny the fact.”
“I had not at that time the honour of knowing any lady in the assembly
“Shall we ask your cousin the reason of this?” said Elizabeth, still
education, and who has lived in the world, is ill qualified to recommend
him. It is because he will not give himself the trouble.”
“I certainly have not the talent which some people possess,” said Darcy,
catch their tone of conversation, or appear interested in their
“My fingers,” said Elizabeth, “do not move over this instrument in the
masterly manner which I see so many women's do. They have not the same
force or rapidity, and do not produce the same expression. But then I
have always supposed it to be my own fault--because I will not take the
capable as any other woman's of superior execution.”
time much better. No one admitted to the privilege of hearing you can
think anything wanting. We neither of us perform to strangers.”
Here they were interrupted by Lady Catherine, who called out to know
what they were talking of. Elizabeth immediately began playing again.
Lady Catherine approached, and, after listening for a few minutes, said
could have the advantage of a London master. She has a very good notion
cousin's praise; but neither at that moment nor at any other could she
discern any symptom of love; and from the whole of his behaviour to Miss
Lady Catherine continued her remarks on Elizabeth's performance, mixing
with them many instructions on execution and taste. Elizabeth received
them with all the forbearance of civility, and, at the request of the
gentlemen, remained at the instrument till her ladyship's carriage was
ready to take them all home.
Elizabeth was sitting by herself the next morning, and writing to Jane
while Mrs. Collins and Maria were gone on business into the village,
when she was startled by a ring at the door, the certain signal of a
be Lady Catherine, and under that apprehension was putting away her
when the door opened, and, to her very great surprise, Mr. Darcy, and
Mr. Darcy only, entered the room.
intrusion by letting her know that he had understood all the ladies were
They then sat down, and when her inquiries after Rosings were made,
necessary, therefore, to think of something, and in this emergence
feeling curious to know what he would say on the subject of their hasty
“How very suddenly you all quitted Netherfield last November, Mr. Darcy!
all after him so soon; for, if I recollect right, he went but the day
She found that she was to receive no other answer, and, after a short
returning to Netherfield again?”
very little of his time there in the future. He has many friends, and
“If he means to be but little at Netherfield, it would be better for
the neighbourhood that he should give up the place entirely, for then we
might possibly get a settled family there. But, perhaps, Mr. Bingley did
not take the house so much for the convenience of the neighbourhood as
for his own, and we must expect him to keep it or quit it on the same
friend; and, having nothing else to say, was now determined to leave the
He took the hint, and soon began with, “This seems a very comfortable
house. Lady Catherine, I believe, did a great deal to it when Mr.
of the very few sensible women who would have accepted him, or have made
him happy if they had. My friend has an excellent understanding--though
I am not certain that I consider her marrying Mr. Collins as the
“I should never have considered the distance as one of the _advantages_
of the match,” cried Elizabeth. “I should never have said Mrs. Collins
the very neighbourhood of Longbourn, I suppose, would appear far.”
As he spoke there was a sort of smile which Elizabeth fancied she
Netherfield, and she blushed as she answered:
family. The far and the near must be relative, and depend on many
varying circumstances. Where there is fortune to make the expenses of
travelling unimportant, distance becomes no evil. But that is not the
the present distance.”
feeling; he drew back his chair, took a newspaper from the table, and
A short dialogue on the subject of the country ensued, on either side
calm and concise--and soon put an end to by the entrance of Charlotte
them. Mr. Darcy related the mistake which had occasioned his intruding
“What can be the meaning of this?” said Charlotte, as soon as he was
even to Charlotte's wishes, to be the case; and after various
conjectures, they could at last only suppose his visit to proceed from
the difficulty of finding anything to do, which was the more probable
from the time of year. All field sports were over. Within doors there
was Lady Catherine, books, and a billiard-table, but gentlemen cannot
always be within doors; and in the nearness of the Parsonage, or the
pleasantness of the walk to it, or of the people who lived in it, the
two cousins found a temptation from this period of walking thither
almost every day. They called at various times of the morning, sometimes
separately, sometimes together, and now and then accompanied by their
aunt. It was plain to them all that Colonel Fitzwilliam came because he
had pleasure in their society, a persuasion which of course recommended
former favourite George Wickham; and though, in comparing them, she saw
there was less captivating softness in Colonel Fitzwilliam's manners,
she believed he might have the best informed mind.
But why Mr. Darcy came so often to the Parsonage, it was more difficult
to understand. It could not be for society, as he frequently sat there
ten minutes together without opening his lips; and when he did speak,
it seemed the effect of necessity rather than of choice--a sacrifice
her; and as she would liked to have believed this change the effect
of love, and the object of that love her friend Eliza, she set herself
seriously to work to find it out. She watched him whenever they were at
certainly looked at her friend a great deal, but the expression of that
doubted whether there were much admiration in it, and sometimes it
She had once or twice suggested to Elizabeth the possibility of his
being partial to her, but Elizabeth always laughed at the idea; and Mrs.
Collins did not think it right to press the subject, from the danger of
Colonel Fitzwilliam. He was beyond comparison the most pleasant man; he
to counterbalance these advantages, Mr. Darcy had considerable patronage
in the church, and his cousin could have none at all.
More than once did Elizabeth, in her ramble within the park,
unexpectedly meet Mr. Darcy. She felt all the perverseness of the
therefore, was very odd! Yet it did, and even a third. It seemed like
wilful ill-nature, or a voluntary penance, for on these occasions it was
not merely a few formal inquiries and an awkward pause and then away,
never said a great deal, nor did she give herself the trouble of talking
or of listening much; but it struck her in the course of their third
Rosings and her not perfectly understanding the house, he seemed to
_there_ too. His words seemed to imply it. Could he have Colonel
her a little, and she was quite glad to find herself at the gate in the
pales opposite the Parsonage.
on looking up that Colonel Fitzwilliam was meeting her. Putting away the
“I have been making the tour of the park,” he replied, “as I generally
do every year, and intend to close it with a call at the Parsonage. Are
you going much farther?”
And accordingly she did turn, and they walked towards the Parsonage
together.
arranges the business just as he pleases.”
“And if not able to please himself in the arrangement, he has at least
pleasure in the great power of choice. I do not know anybody who seems
more to enjoy the power of doing what he likes than Mr. Darcy.”
than many others, because he is rich, and many others are poor. I speak
“In my opinion, the younger son of an earl can know very little of
either. Now seriously, what have you ever known of self-denial and
they like.”
“Unless where they like women of fortune, which I think they very often
“Our habits of expense make us too dependent, and there are not many
“Is this,” thought Elizabeth, “meant for me?” and she coloured at the
is the usual price of an earl's younger son? Unless the elder brother is
He answered her in the same style, and the subject dropped. To interrupt
“I imagine your cousin brought you down with him chiefly for the sake of
for the present, and, as she is under his sole care, he may do what he
divide with me. I am joined with him in the guardianship of Miss Darcy.”
little difficult to manage, and if she has the true Darcy spirit, she
As she spoke she observed him looking at her earnestly; and the manner
give them any uneasiness, convinced her that she had somehow or other
got pretty near the truth. She directly replied:
say she is one of the most tractable creatures in the world. She is a
Miss Bingley. I think I have heard you say that you know them.”
“I know them a little. Their brother is a pleasant gentlemanlike man--he
our journey hither, I have reason to think Bingley very much indebted to
Bingley was the person meant. It was all conjecture.”
because if it were to get round to the lady's family, it would be an
on having lately saved a friend from the inconveniences of a most
imprudent marriage, but without mentioning names or any other
him the kind of young man to get into a scrape of that sort, and from
knowing them to have been together the whole of last summer.”
“I understood that there were some very strong objections against the
“And what arts did he use to separate them?”
cousin's conduct does not suit my feelings. Why was he to be the judge?”
“You are rather disposed to call his interference officious?”
“I do not see what right Mr. Darcy had to decide on the propriety of his
But,” she continued, recollecting herself, “as we know none of the
that there was much affection in the case.”
lessening of the honour of my cousin's triumph very sadly.”
therefore, abruptly changing the conversation talked on indifferent
matters until they reached the Parsonage. There, shut into her own room,
as soon as their visitor left them, she could think without interruption
of all that she had heard. It was not to be supposed that any other
could not exist in the world _two_ men over whom Mr. Darcy could have
such boundless influence. That he had been concerned in the measures
always attributed to Miss Bingley the principal design and arrangement
of them. If his own vanity, however, did not mislead him, _he_ was
the cause, his pride and caprice were the cause, of all that Jane had
every hope of happiness for the most affectionate, generous heart in the
“There were some very strong objections against the lady,” were Colonel
having one uncle who was a country attorney, and another who was in
“To Jane herself,” she exclaimed, “there could be no possibility of
excellent, her mind improved, and her manners captivating. Neither
could anything be urged against my father, who, though with some
her mother, her confidence gave way a little; but she would not allow
that any objections _there_ had material weight with Mr. Darcy, whose
pride, she was convinced, would receive a deeper wound from the want of
importance in his friend's connections, than from their want of sense;
by this worst kind of pride, and partly by the wish of retaining Mr.
The agitation and tears which the subject occasioned, brought on a
headache; and it grew so much worse towards the evening, that, added to
cousins to Rosings, where they were engaged to drink tea. Mrs. Collins,
could not conceal his apprehension of Lady Catherine's being rather
When they were gone, Elizabeth, as if intending to exasperate herself
as much as possible against Mr. Darcy, chose for her employment the
examination of all the letters which Jane had written to her since her
being in Kent. They contained no actual complaint, nor was there any
But in all, and in almost every line of each, there was a want of that
proceeding from the serenity of a mind at ease with itself and kindly
noticed every sentence conveying the idea of uneasiness, with an
attention which it had hardly received on the first perusal. Mr. Darcy's
to think that his visit to Rosings was to end on the day after the
herself be with Jane again, and enabled to contribute to the recovery of
While settling this point, she was suddenly roused by the sound of the
door-bell, and her spirits were a little fluttered by the idea of its
the evening, and might now come to inquire particularly after her.
affected, when, to her utter amazement, she saw Mr. Darcy walk into the
then getting up, walked about the room. Elizabeth was surprised, but
and the avowal of all that he felt, and had long felt for her,
immediately followed. He spoke well; but there were feelings besides
those of the heart to be detailed; and he was not more eloquent on the
its being a degradation--of the family obstacles which had always
the consequence he was wounding, but was very unlikely to recommend his
the compliment of such a man's affection, and though her intentions did
not vary for an instant, she was at first sorry for the pain he was to
representing to her the strength of that attachment which, in spite
only exasperate farther, and, when he ceased, the colour rose into her
“In such cases as this, it is, I believe, the established mode to
express a sense of obligation for the sentiments avowed, however
unequally they may be returned. It is natural that obligation should
the acknowledgment of your regard, can have little difficulty in
Mr. Darcy, who was leaning against the mantelpiece with his eyes fixed
surprise. His complexion became pale with anger, and the disturbance
of his mind was visible in every feature. He was struggling for the
“And this is all the reply which I am to have the honour of expecting!
other provocations. You know I have. Had not my feelings decided against
you--had they been indifferent, or had they even been favourable, do you
think that any consideration would tempt me to accept the man who has
been the means of ruining, perhaps for ever, the happiness of a most
As she pronounced these words, Mr. Darcy changed colour; but the emotion
“I have every reason in the world to think ill of you. No motive can
excuse the unjust and ungenerous part you acted _there_. You dare not,
you cannot deny, that you have been the principal, if not the only means
of dividing them from each other--of exposing one to the censure of the
world for caprice and instability, and the other to its derision for
disappointed hopes, and involving them both in misery of the acutest
With assumed tranquillity he then replied: “I have no wish of denying
Elizabeth disdained the appearance of noticing this civil reflection,
decided. Your character was unfolded in the recital which I received
or under what misrepresentation can you here impose upon others?”
withheld the advantages which you must know to have been designed for
him. You have deprived the best years of his life of that independence
and yet you can treat the mention of his misfortune with contempt and
“And this,” cried Darcy, as he walked with quick steps across the room,
“is your opinion of me! This is the estimation in which you hold me!
his walk, and turning towards her, “these offenses might have been
overlooked, had not your pride been hurt by my honest confession of the
policy, concealed my struggles, and flattered you into the belief of
Nor am I ashamed of the feelings I related. They were natural and
just. Could you expect me to rejoice in the inferiority of your
connections?--to congratulate myself on the hope of relations, whose
the utmost to speak with composure when she said:
“You are mistaken, Mr. Darcy, if you suppose that the mode of your
declaration affected me in any other way, than as it spared me the concern
“You could not have made the offer of your hand in any possible way that
“From the very beginning--from the first moment, I may almost say--of
my acquaintance with you, your manners, impressing me with the fullest
the feelings of others, were such as to form the groundwork of
dislike; and I had not known you a month before I felt that you were the
last man in the world whom I could ever be prevailed on to marry.”
And with these words he hastily left the room, and Elizabeth heard him
the next moment open the front door and quit the house.
all the objections which had made him prevent his friend's marrying
not justify it, and the unfeeling manner in which he had mentioned Mr.
overcame the pity which the consideration of his attachment had for
a moment excited. She continued in very agitated reflections till the
sound of Lady Catherine's carriage made her feel how unequal she was to
Elizabeth awoke the next morning to the same thoughts and meditations
which had at length closed her eyes. She could not yet recover from the
directly to her favourite walk, when the recollection of Mr. Darcy's
sometimes coming there stopped her, and instead of entering the park,
she turned up the lane, which led farther from the turnpike-road. The
park paling was still the boundary on one side, and she soon passed one
of the gates into the ground.
After walking two or three times along that part of the lane, she was
tempted, by the pleasantness of the morning, to stop at the gates and
look into the park. The five weeks which she had now passed in Kent had
made a great difference in the country, and every day was adding to the
verdure of the early trees. She was on the point of continuing her walk,
when she caught a glimpse of a gentleman within the sort of grove which
edged the park; he was moving that way; and, fearful of its being Mr.
Darcy, she was directly retreating. But the person who advanced was now
in a voice which proved it to be Mr. Darcy, she moved again towards the
“I have been walking in the grove some time in the hope of meeting you.
Will you do me the honour of reading that letter?” And then, with a
slight bow, turned again into the plantation, and was soon out of sight.
With no expectation of pleasure, but with the strongest curiosity,
Elizabeth opened the letter, and, to her still increasing wonder,
full. Pursuing her way along the lane, she then began it. It was dated
from Rosings, at eight o'clock in the morning, and was as follows:--
“Be not alarmed, madam, on receiving this letter, by the apprehension
which, for the happiness of both, cannot be too soon forgotten; and the
effort which the formation and the perusal of this letter must occasion,
and read. You must, therefore, pardon the freedom with which I demand
that, regardless of the sentiments of either, I had detached Mr. Bingley
from your sister, and the other, that I had, in defiance of various
claims, in defiance of honour and humanity, ruined the immediate
prosperity and blasted the prospects of Mr. Wickham. Wilfully and
wantonly to have thrown off the companion of my youth, the acknowledged
favourite of my father, a young man who had scarcely any other
its exertion, would be a depravity, to which the separation of two young
persons, whose affection could be the growth of only a few weeks, could
bear no comparison. But from the severity of that blame which was last
to be in the future secured, when the following account of my actions
and their motives has been read. If, in the explanation of them, which
is due to myself, I am under the necessity of relating feelings which
must be obeyed, and further apology would be absurd.
others, that Bingley preferred your elder sister to any other young
woman in the country. But it was not till the evening of the dance
at Netherfield that I had any apprehension of his feeling a serious
had the honour of dancing with you, I was first made acquainted, by Sir
your sister had given rise to a general expectation of their marriage.
He spoke of it as a certain event, of which the time alone could
attentively; and I could then perceive that his partiality for Miss
from the evening's scrutiny, that though she received his attentions
with pleasure, she did not invite them by any participation of
in error. Your superior knowledge of your sister must make the latter
scruple to assert, that the serenity of your sister's countenance and
air was such as might have given the most acute observer a conviction
conviction, as truly as I wished it in reason. My objections to the
the utmost force of passion to put aside, in my own case; the want of
there were other causes of repugnance; causes which, though still
myself endeavoured to forget, because they were not immediately before
mother's family, though objectionable, was nothing in comparison to that
father. Pardon me. It pains me to offend you. But amidst your concern
for the defects of your nearest relations, and your displeasure at this
representation of them, let it give you consolation to consider that, to
have conducted yourselves so as to avoid any share of the like censure,
it is honourable to the sense and disposition of both. I will only say
farther that from what passed that evening, my opinion of all parties
connection. He left Netherfield for London, on the day following, as
you, I am certain, remember, with the design of soon returning.
detaching their brother, we shortly resolved on joining him directly in
London. We accordingly went--and there I readily engaged in the office
of pointing out to my friend the certain evils of such a choice. I
described, and enforced them earnestly. But, however this remonstrance
that it would ultimately have prevented the marriage, had it not been
seconded by the assurance that I hesitated not in giving, of your
own. To convince him, therefore, that he had deceived himself, was
Hertfordshire, when that conviction had been given, was scarcely the
is but one part of my conduct in the whole affair on which I do not
reflect with satisfaction; it is that I condescended to adopt the
brother is even yet ignorant of it. That they might have met without
was done for the best. On this subject I have nothing more to say, no
other apology to offer. If I have wounded your sister's feelings, it
was unknowingly done and though the motives which governed me may to
them.
“With respect to that other, more weighty accusation, of having injured
Mr. Wickham, I can only refute it by laying before you the whole of his
am ignorant; but of the truth of what I shall relate, I can summon more
“Mr. Wickham is the son of a very respectable man, who had for many
years the management of all the Pemberley estates, and whose good
conduct in the discharge of his trust naturally inclined my father to
kindness was therefore liberally bestowed. My father supported him at
own father, always poor from the extravagance of his wife, would have
been unable to give him a gentleman's education. My father was not only
had also the highest opinion of him, and hoping the church would be
manner. The vicious propensities--the want of principle, which he was
careful to guard from the knowledge of his best friend, could not escape
the observation of a young man of nearly the same age with himself,
you only can tell. But whatever may be the sentiments which Mr. Wickham
has created, a suspicion of their nature shall not prevent me from
unfolding his real character--it adds even another motive.
“My excellent father died about five years ago; and his attachment to
Mr. Wickham was to the last so steady, that in his will he particularly
recommended it to me, to promote his advancement in the best manner
was also a legacy of one thousand pounds. His own father did not long
survive mine, and within half a year from these events, Mr. Wickham
immediate pecuniary advantage, in lieu of the preferment, by which he
law, and I must be aware that the interest of one thousand pounds would
be a very insufficient support therein. I rather wished, than believed
his proposal. I knew that Mr. Wickham ought not to be a clergyman; the
business was therefore soon settled--he resigned all claim to assistance
in the church, were it possible that he could ever be in a situation to
lived, but his studying the law was a mere pretence, and being now free
For about three years I heard little of him; but on the decease of the
incumbent of the living which had been designed for him, he applied to
me again by letter for the presentation. His circumstances, he assured
had found the law a most unprofitable study, and was now absolutely
resolved on being ordained, if I would present him to the living in
question--of which he trusted there could be little doubt, as he was
well assured that I had no other person to provide for, and I could not
have forgotten my revered father's intentions. You will hardly blame
repetition to it. His resentment was in proportion to the distress of
to others as in his reproaches to myself. After this period every
and which no obligation less than the present should induce me to unfold
the guardianship of my mother's nephew, Colonel Fitzwilliam, and myself.
for her in London; and last summer she went with the lady who presided
over it, to Ramsgate; and thither also went Mr. Wickham, undoubtedly by
design; for there proved to have been a prior acquaintance between him
to consent to an elopement. She was then but fifteen, which must be her
the knowledge of it to herself. I joined them unexpectedly a day or two
before the intended elopement, and then Georgiana, unable to support the
idea of grieving and offending a brother whom she almost looked up to as
a father, acknowledged the whole to me. You may imagine what I felt and
any public exposure; but I wrote to Mr. Wickham, who left the place
is thirty thousand pounds; but I cannot help supposing that the hope of
been concerned together; and if you do not absolutely reject it as
at. Ignorant as you previously were of everything concerning either,
I was not then master enough of myself to know what could or ought to
be revealed. For the truth of everything here related, I can appeal more
particularly to the testimony of Colonel Fitzwilliam, who, from our
the executors of my father's will, has been unavoidably acquainted
with every particular of these transactions. If your abhorrence of _me_
the same cause from confiding in my cousin; and that there may be
the possibility of consulting him, I shall endeavour to find some
opportunity of putting this letter in your hands in the course of the
If Elizabeth, when Mr. Darcy gave her the letter, did not expect it to
its contents. But such as they were, it may well be supposed how eagerly
she went through them, and what a contrariety of emotion they excited.
had happened at Netherfield. She read with an eagerness which hardly
left her power of comprehension, and from impatience of knowing what the
next sentence might bring, was incapable of attending to the sense of
the one before her eyes. His belief of her sister's insensibility she
instantly resolved to be false; and his account of the real, the worst
objections to the match, made her too angry to have any wish of doing
This cannot be! This must be the grossest falsehood!”--and when she had
gone through the whole letter, though scarcely knowing anything of the
nothing, she walked on; but it would not do; in half a minute the letter
again began the mortifying perusal of all that related to Wickham, and
commanded herself so far as to examine the meaning of every sentence.
The account of his connection with the Pemberley family was exactly what
he had related himself; and the kindness of the late Mr. Darcy, though
words. So far each recital confirmed the other; but when she came to the
will, the difference was great. What Wickham had said of the living
impossible not to feel that there was gross duplicity on one side or the
other; and, for a few moments, she flattered herself that her wishes did
not err. But when she read and re-read with the closest attention, the
to the living, of his receiving in lieu so considerable a sum as three
the letter, weighed every circumstance with what she meant to be
impartiality--deliberated on the probability of each statement--but with
on; but every line proved more clearly that the affair, which she had
turn which must make him entirely blameless throughout the whole.
Mr. Wickham's charge, exceedingly shocked her; the more so, as she could
entrance into the ----shire Militia, in which he had engaged at the
persuasion of the young man who, on meeting him accidentally in town,
had there renewed a slight acquaintance. Of his former way of life
established him at once in the possession of every virtue. She tried
integrity or benevolence, that might rescue him from the attacks of
Mr. Darcy; or at least, by the predominance of virtue, atone for those
had described as the idleness and vice of many years' continuance. But
substantial good than the general approbation of the neighbourhood, and
the regard which his social powers had gained him in the mess. After
read. But, alas! the story which followed, of his designs on Miss
Fitzwilliam and herself only the morning before; and at last she was
referred for the truth of every particular to Colonel Fitzwilliam
himself--from whom she had previously received the information of his
him, but the idea was checked by the awkwardness of the application, and
at length wholly banished by the conviction that Mr. Darcy would never
between Wickham and herself, in their first evening at Mr. Phillips's.
struck with the impropriety of such communications to a stranger, and
wondered it had escaped her before. She saw the indelicacy of putting
himself forward as he had done, and the inconsistency of his professions
of seeing Mr. Darcy--that Mr. Darcy might leave the country, but that
_he_ should stand his ground; yet he had avoided the Netherfield ball
the very next week. She remembered also that, till the Netherfield
family had quitted the country, he had told his story to no one but
herself; but that after their removal it had been everywhere discussed;
that he had then no reserves, no scruples in sinking Mr. Darcy's
character, though he had assured her that respect for the father would
always prevent his exposing the son.
His attentions to Miss King were now the consequence of views solely and
hatefully mercenary; and the mediocrity of her fortune proved no longer
the moderation of his wishes, but his eagerness to grasp at anything.
either been deceived with regard to her fortune, or had been gratifying
his vanity by encouraging the preference which she believed she had most
and fainter; and in farther justification of Mr. Darcy, she could not
asserted his blamelessness in the affair; that proud and repulsive as
were his manners, she had never, in the whole course of their
acquaintance--an acquaintance which had latterly brought them much
together, and given her a sort of intimacy with his ways--seen anything
brother, and that she had often heard him speak so affectionately of his
actions been what Mr. Wickham represented them, so gross a violation of
everything right could hardly have been concealed from the world; and
She grew absolutely ashamed of herself. Of neither Darcy nor Wickham
often disdained the generous candour of my sister, and gratified
folly. Pleased with the preference of one, and offended by the neglect
of the other, on the very beginning of our acquaintance, I have courted
prepossession and ignorance, and driven reason away, where either were
_there_ had appeared very insufficient, and she read it again. Widely
different was the effect of a second perusal. How could she deny that
give in the other? He declared himself to be totally unsuspicious of her
opinion had always been. Neither could she deny the justice of his
little displayed, and that there was a constant complacency in her air
When she came to that part of the letter in which her family were
of shame was severe. The justice of the charge struck her too forcibly
for denial, and the circumstances to which he particularly alluded as
having passed at the Netherfield ball, and as confirming all his first
The compliment to herself and her sister was not unfelt. It soothed,
but it could not console her for the contempt which had thus been
self-attracted by the rest of her family; and as she considered
that Jane's disappointment had in fact been the work of her nearest
relations, and reflected how materially the credit of both must be hurt
After wandering along the lane for two hours, giving way to every
her at length return home; and she entered the house with the wish
of appearing cheerful as usual, and the resolution of repressing such
She was immediately told that the two gentlemen from Rosings had each
leave--but that Colonel Fitzwilliam had been sitting with them at least
The two gentlemen left Rosings the next morning, and Mr. Collins having
been in waiting near the lodges, to make them his parting obeisance, was
able to bring home the pleasing intelligence, of their appearing in very
good health, and in as tolerable spirits as could be expected, after the
melancholy scene so lately gone through at Rosings. To Rosings he then
hastened, to console Lady Catherine and her daughter; and on his return
having them all to dine with her.
Elizabeth could not see Lady Catherine without recollecting that, had
Their first subject was the diminution of the Rosings party. “I assure
you, I feel it exceedingly,” said Lady Catherine; “I believe no one
feels the loss of friends so much as I do. But I am particularly
attached to these young men, and know them to be so much attached to
me! They were excessively sorry to go! But so they always are. The
were kindly smiled on by the mother and daughter.
Lady Catherine observed, after dinner, that Miss Bennet seemed out of
“But if that is the case, you must write to your mother and beg that
spare you for another fortnight.”
“But my father cannot. He wrote last week to hurry my return.”
“Oh! your father of course may spare you, if your mother can. Daughters
are never of so much consequence to a father. And if you will stay
another _month_ complete, it will be in my power to take one of you as
far as London, for I am going there early in June, for a week; and as
Dawson does not object to the barouche-box, there will be very good room
for one of you--and indeed, if the weather should happen to be cool, I
should not object to taking you both, as you are neither of you large.”
Lady Catherine seemed resigned. “Mrs. Collins, you must send a servant
with them. You know I always speak my mind, and I cannot bear the idea
of two young women travelling post by themselves. It is highly improper.
You must contrive to send somebody. I have the greatest dislike in
the world to that sort of thing. Young women should always be properly
guarded and attended, according to their situation in life. When my
having two men-servants go with her. Miss Darcy, the daughter of
things. You must send John with the young ladies, Mrs. Collins. I
discreditable to _you_ to let them go alone.”
have somebody who thinks of these things. Where shall you change horses?
Oh! Bromley, of course. If you mention my name at the Bell, you will be
Lady Catherine had many other questions to ask respecting their journey,
and as she did not answer them all herself, attention was necessary,
as the greatest relief; and not a day went by without a solitary
walk, in which she might indulge in all the delight of unpleasant
times widely different. When she remembered the style of his address,
herself; and his disappointed feelings became the object of compassion.
or feel the slightest inclination ever to see him again. In her own past
behaviour, there was a constant source of vexation and regret; and in
the unhappy defects of her family, a subject of yet heavier chagrin.
They were hopeless of remedy. Her father, contented with laughing at
them, would never exert himself to restrain the wild giddiness of his
youngest daughters; and her mother, with manners so far from right
herself, was entirely insensible of the evil. Elizabeth had frequently
united with Jane in an endeavour to check the imprudence of Catherine
and Lydia; but while they were supported by their mother's indulgence,
what chance could there be of improvement? Catherine, weak-spirited,
affronted by their advice; and Lydia, self-willed and careless, would
scarcely give them a hearing. They were ignorant, idle, and vain. While
there was an officer in Meryton, they would flirt with him; and while
Meryton was within a walk of Longbourn, they would be going there
Anxiety on Jane's behalf was another prevailing concern; and Mr. Darcy's
heightened the sense of what Jane had lost. His affection was proved
could attach to the implicitness of his confidence in his friend. How
grievous then was the thought that, of a situation so desirable in every
been deprived, by the folly and indecorum of her own family!
When to these recollections was added the development of Wickham's
character, it may be easily believed that the happy spirits which had
Their engagements at Rosings were as frequent during the last week of
her stay as they had been at first. The very last evening was spent
there; and her ladyship again inquired minutely into the particulars of
their journey, gave them directions as to the best method of packing,
and was so urgent on the necessity of placing gowns in the only right
way, that Maria thought herself obliged, on her return, to undo all the
work of the morning, and pack her trunk afresh.
When they parted, Lady Catherine, with great condescension, wished them
a good journey, and invited them to come to Hunsford again next year;
minutes before the others appeared; and he took the opportunity of
paying the parting civilities which he deemed indispensably necessary.
“I know not, Miss Elizabeth,” said he, “whether Mrs. Collins has yet
certain you will not leave the house without receiving her thanks for
know how little there is to tempt anyone to our humble abode. Our plain
manner of living, our small rooms and few domestics, and the little we
see of the world, must make Hunsford extremely dull to a young lady like
yourself; but I hope you will believe us grateful for the condescension,
had spent six weeks with great enjoyment; and the pleasure of being with
Charlotte, and the kind attentions she had received, must make _her_
feel the obliged. Mr. Collins was gratified, and with a more smiling
from our connection with Rosings, the frequent means of varying the
Lady Catherine's family is indeed the sort of extraordinary advantage
see how continually we are engaged there. In truth I must acknowledge
that, with all the disadvantages of this humble parsonage, I should
not think anyone abiding in it an object of compassion, while they are
Words were insufficient for the elevation of his feelings; and he was
obliged to walk about the room, while Elizabeth tried to unite civility
be able to do so. Lady Catherine's great attentions to Mrs. Collins you
have been a daily witness of; and altogether I trust it does not appear
other.”
the case, and with equal sincerity could add, that she firmly believed
have the recital of them interrupted by the lady from whom they sprang.
home and her housekeeping, her parish and her poultry, and all their
dependent concerns, had not yet lost their charms.
At length the chaise arrived, the trunks were fastened on, the parcels
parting between the friends, Elizabeth was attended to the carriage by
Mr. Collins, and as they walked down the garden he was commissioning her
for the kindness he had received at Longbourn in the winter, and his
compliments to Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner, though unknown. He then handed her
in, Maria followed, and the door was on the point of being closed,
when he suddenly reminded them, with some consternation, that they had
hitherto forgotten to leave any message for the ladies at Rosings.
delivered to them, with your grateful thanks for their kindness to you
Elizabeth made no objection; the door was then allowed to be shut, and
the carriage drove off.
“We have dined nine times at Rosings, besides drinking tea there twice!
within four hours of their leaving Hunsford they reached Mr. Gardiner's
house, where they were to remain a few days.
spirits, amidst the various engagements which the kindness of her
aunt had reserved for them. But Jane was to go home with her, and at
Longbourn there would be leisure enough for observation.
that she had the power of revealing what would so exceedingly astonish
Jane, and must, at the same time, so highly gratify whatever of her own
to openness as nothing could have conquered but the state of indecision
in which she remained as to the extent of what she should communicate;
and her fear, if she once entered on the subject, of being hurried
further.
It was the second week in May, in which the three young ladies set out
together from Gracechurch Street for the town of ----, in Hertfordshire;
and, as they drew near the appointed inn where Mr. Bennet's carriage
was to meet them, they quickly perceived, in token of the coachman's
These two girls had been above an hour in the place, happily employed
in visiting an opposite milliner, watching the sentinel on guard, and
After welcoming their sisters, they triumphantly displayed a table set
“And we mean to treat you all,” added Lydia, “but you must lend us the
money, for we have just spent ours at the shop out there.” Then, showing
unconcern, “Oh! but there were two or three much uglier in the shop; and
one wears this summer, after the ----shire have left Meryton, and they
“Are they indeed!” cried Elizabeth, with the greatest satisfaction.
take us all there for the summer! It would be such a delicious scheme;
regiment of militia, and the monthly balls of Meryton!”
“Now I have got some news for you,” said Lydia, as they sat down at
Jane and Elizabeth looked at each other, and the waiter was told he need
“Aye, that is just like your formality and discretion. You thought the
my news; it is about dear Wickham; too good for the waiter, is it not?
“But I hope there is no strong attachment on either side,” said Jane.
“I am sure there is not on _his_. I will answer for it, he never cared
coarseness of _expression_ herself, the coarseness of the _sentiment_
was little other than her own breast had harboured and fancied liberal!
As soon as all had ate, and the elder ones paid, the carriage was
ordered; and after some contrivance, the whole party, with all their
boxes, work-bags, and parcels, and the unwelcome addition of Kitty's and
bonnet, if it is only for the fun of having another bandbox! Well, now
let us be quite comfortable and snug, and talk and laugh all the way
home. And in the first place, let us hear what has happened to you all
Collins; but _I_ do not think there would have been any fun in it. Lord!
how I should like to be married before any of you; and then I would
chaperon you about to all the balls. Dear me! we had such a good piece
of fun the other day at Colonel Forster's. Kitty and me were to spend
the day there, and Mrs. Forster promised to have a little dance in the
evening; (by the bye, Mrs. Forster and me are _such_ friends!) and so
she asked the two Harringtons to come, but Harriet was ill, and so Pen
was forced to come by herself; and then, what do you think we did? We
dressed up Chamberlayne in woman's clothes on purpose to pass for a
and Wickham, and Pratt, and two or three more of the men came in, they
did not know him in the least. Lord! how I laughed! and so did Mrs.
Forster. I thought I should have died. And _that_ made the men suspect
something, and then they soon found out what was the matter.”
With such kinds of histories of their parties and good jokes, did
companions all the way to Longbourn. Elizabeth listened as little as she
could, but there was no escaping the frequent mention of Wickham's name.
Their party in the dining-room was large, for almost all the Lucases
came to meet Maria and hear the news; and various were the subjects that
occupied them: Lady Lucas was inquiring of Maria, after the welfare and
hand collecting an account of the present fashions from Jane, who sat
some way below her, and, on the other, retailing them all to the younger
Lucases; and Lydia, in a voice rather louder than any other person's,
was enumerating the various pleasures of the morning to anybody who
As we went along, Kitty and I drew up the blinds, and pretended there
was nobody in the coach; and I should have gone so all the way, if Kitty
had not been sick; and when we got to the George, I do think we behaved
very handsomely, for we treated the other three with the nicest cold
luncheon in the world, and if you would have gone, we would have treated
you too. And then when we came away it was such fun! I thought we never
should have got into the coach. I was ready to die of laughter. And then
we were so merry all the way home! we talked and laughed so loud, that
to depreciate such pleasures! They would doubtless be congenial with the
generality of female minds. But I confess they would have no charms for
In the afternoon Lydia was urgent with the rest of the girls to walk
opposed the scheme. It should not be said that the Miss Bennets could
not be at home half a day before they were in pursuit of the officers.
There was another reason too for her opposition. She dreaded seeing Mr.
comfort to _her_ of the regiment's approaching removal was indeed beyond
expression. In a fortnight they were to go--and once gone, she hoped
there could be nothing more to plague her on his account.
She had not been many hours at home before she found that the Brighton
scheme, of which Lydia had given them a hint at the inn, was under
father had not the smallest intention of yielding; but his answers were
at the same time so vague and equivocal, that her mother, though often
surprised, she related to her the next morning the chief of the scene
Miss Bennet's astonishment was soon lessened by the strong sisterly
natural; and all surprise was shortly lost in other feelings. She was
little suited to recommend them; but still more was she grieved for the
other feelings, which will probably soon drive away his regard for me.
“But you _will_ know it, when I tell you what happened the very next
She then spoke of the letter, repeating the whole of its contents as far
as they concerned George Wickham. What a stroke was this for poor Jane!
who would willingly have gone through the world without believing that
so much wickedness existed in the whole race of mankind, as was here
Most earnestly did she labour to prove the probability of error, and
seek to clear the one without involving the other.
of them good for anything. Take your choice, but you must be satisfied
with only one. There is but such a quantity of merit between them; just
consider what he must have suffered. Such a disappointment! and with the
be as light as a feather.”
“Poor Wickham! there is such an expression of goodness in his
“There certainly was some great mismanagement in the education of those
two young men. One has got all the goodness, and the other all the
“I never thought Mr. Darcy so deficient in the _appearance_ of it as you
at a man without now and then stumbling on something witty.”
the matter as you do now.”
in speaking of Wickham to Mr. Darcy, for now they _do_ appear wholly
“Certainly. But the misfortune of speaking with bitterness is a most
natural consequence of the prejudices I had been encouraging. There
is one point on which I want your advice. I want to be told whether I
Miss Bennet paused a little, and then replied, “Surely there can be no
to make his communication public. On the contrary, every particular
myself; and if I endeavour to undeceive people as to the rest of his
is so violent, that it would be the death of half the good people in
to it. Wickham will soon be gone; and therefore it will not signify to
and then we may laugh at their stupidity in not knowing it before. At
got rid of two of the secrets which had weighed on her for a fortnight,
to talk again of either. But there was still something lurking behind,
of which prudence forbade the disclosure. She dared not relate the other
understanding between the parties could justify her in throwing off
this last encumbrance of mystery. “And then,” said she, “if that very
She was now, on being settled at home, at leisure to observe the real
in love before, her regard had all the warmth of first attachment,
and prefer him to every other man, that all her good sense, and all her
attention to the feelings of her friends, were requisite to check the
health and their tranquillity.
of it again to anybody. I told my sister Phillips so the other day. But
a very undeserving young man--and I do not suppose there's the least
chance in the world of her ever getting him now. There is no talk of
his coming to Netherfield again in the summer; and I have inquired of
“I do not believe he will ever live at Netherfield any more.”
die of a broken heart; and then he will be sorry for what he has done.”
“Well, Lizzy,” continued her mother, soon afterwards, “and so the
Collinses live very comfortable, do they? Well, well, I only hope
it will last. And what sort of table do they keep? Charlotte is an
mother, she is saving enough. There is nothing extravagant in _their_
“A great deal of good management, depend upon it. Yes, yes, _they_ will
take care not to outrun their income. _They_ will never be distressed
for money. Well, much good may it do them! And so, I suppose, they often
talk of having Longbourn when your father is dead. They look upon it as
quite their own, I dare say, whenever that happens.”
“It was a subject which they could not mention before me.”
“No; it would have been strange if they had; but I make no doubt they
often talk of it between themselves. Well, if they can be easy with an
estate that is not lawfully their own, so much the better. I should be
The first week of their return was soon gone. The second began. It was
the last of the regiment's stay in Meryton, and all the young ladies
in the neighbourhood were drooping apace. The dejection was almost
and sleep, and pursue the usual course of their employments. Very
frequently were they reproached for this insensibility by Kitty and
hard-heartedness in any of the family.
“Good Heaven! what is to become of us? What are we to do?” would they
often exclaim in the bitterness of woe. “How can you be smiling so,
Their affectionate mother shared all their grief; she remembered what
“I am sure,” said she, “I cried for two days together when Colonel
Such were the kind of lamentations resounding perpetually through
Longbourn House. Elizabeth tried to be diverted by them; but all sense
of pleasure was lost in shame. She felt anew the justice of Mr. Darcy's
interference in the views of his friend.
But the gloom of Lydia's prospect was shortly cleared away; for she
received an invitation from Mrs. Forster, the wife of the colonel of
the regiment, to accompany her to Brighton. This invaluable friend was a
and good spirits had recommended her and Lydia to each other, and out of
their _three_ months' acquaintance they had been intimate _two_.
the delight of Mrs. Bennet, and the mortification of Kitty, are scarcely
flew about the house in restless ecstasy, calling for everyone's
whilst the luckless Kitty continued in the parlour repined at her fate
exciting in her the same feelings as in her mother and Lydia, that she
considered it as the death warrant of all possibility of common sense
for the latter; and detestable as such a step must make her were it
known, she could not help secretly advising her father not to let her
go. She represented to him all the improprieties of Lydia's general
behaviour, the little advantage she could derive from the friendship of
such a woman as Mrs. Forster, and the probability of her being yet more
imprudent with such a companion at Brighton, where the temptations must
be greater than at home. He heard her attentively, and then said:
place or other, and we can never expect her to do it with so
little expense or inconvenience to her family as under the present
“If you were aware,” said Elizabeth, “of the very great disadvantage to
us all which must arise from the public notice of Lydia's unguarded and
would judge differently in the affair.”
are not worth a regret. Come, let me see the list of pitiful fellows who
importance, our respectability in the world must be affected by the
wild volatility, the assurance and disdain of all restraint which mark
father, will not take the trouble of checking her exuberant spirits, and
of teaching her that her present pursuits are not to be the business of
her life, she will soon be beyond the reach of amendment. Her character
will be fixed, and she will, at sixteen, be the most determined flirt
that ever made herself or her family ridiculous; a flirt, too, in the
youth and a tolerable person; and, from the ignorance and emptiness
ignorant, idle, and absolutely uncontrolled! Oh! my dear father, can you
suppose it possible that they will not be censured and despised wherever
they are known, and that their sisters will not be often involved in the
Mr. Bennet saw that her whole heart was in the subject, and
Brighton. Let her go, then. Colonel Forster is a sensible man, and will
women better worth their notice. Let us hope, therefore, that her being
there may teach her her own insignificance. At any rate, she cannot grow
many degrees worse, without authorising us to lock her up for the rest
continued the same, and she left him disappointed and sorry. It was not
them. She was confident of having performed her duty, and to fret
over unavoidable evils, or augment them by anxiety, was no part of her
Had Lydia and her mother known the substance of her conference with her
father, their indignation would hardly have found expression in their
every possibility of earthly happiness. She saw, with the creative eye
of fancy, the streets of that gay bathing-place covered with officers.
She saw herself the object of attention, to tens and to scores of them
at present unknown. She saw all the glories of the camp--its tents
stretched forth in beauteous uniformity of lines, crowded with the young
and the gay, and dazzling with scarlet; and, to complete the view, she
realities as these, what would have been her sensations? They could have
been understood only by her mother, who might have felt nearly the same.
conviction of her husband's never intending to go there himself.
But they were entirely ignorant of what had passed; and their raptures
continued, with little intermission, to the very day of Lydia's leaving
Elizabeth was now to see Mr. Wickham for the last time. Having been
well over; the agitations of former partiality entirely so. She had even
learnt to detect, in the very gentleness which had first delighted
for the inclination he soon testified of renewing those intentions which
had marked the early part of their acquaintance could only serve, after
finding herself thus selected as the object of such idle and frivolous
gallantry; and while she steadily repressed it, could not but feel the
and her preference secured at any time by their renewal.
On the very last day of the regiment's remaining at Meryton, he dined,
with other of the officers, at Longbourn; and so little was Elizabeth
inquiry as to the manner in which her time had passed at Hunsford, she
weeks at Rosings, and asked him, if he was acquainted with the former.
While she spoke, Wickham looked as if scarcely knowing whether to
rejoice over her words, or to distrust their meaning. There was a
embarrassment, he turned to her again, and said in the gentlest of
even the _appearance_ of what is right. His pride, in that direction,
may be of service, if not to himself, to many others, for it must only
fear that the sort of cautiousness to which you, I imagine, have been
operated, I know, when they were together; and a good deal is to be
imputed to his wish of forwarding the match with Miss de Bourgh, which I
slight inclination of the head. She saw that he wanted to engage her on
the old subject of his grievances, and she was in no humour to indulge
him. The rest of the evening passed with the _appearance_, on his
side, of usual cheerfulness, but with no further attempt to distinguish
Elizabeth; and they parted at last with mutual civility, and possibly a
When the party broke up, Lydia returned with Mrs. Forster to Meryton,
from whence they were to set out early the next morning. The separation
between her and her family was rather noisy than pathetic. Kitty was the
Bennet was diffuse in her good wishes for the felicity of her daughter,
and impressive in her injunctions that she should not miss the
there was every reason to believe would be well attended to; and in
the clamorous happiness of Lydia herself in bidding farewell, the more
comfort. Her father, captivated by youth and beauty, and that appearance
their marriage put an end to all real affection for her. Respect,
a disposition to seek comfort for the disappointment which his own
console the unfortunate for their folly or their vice. He was fond of
the country and of books; and from these tastes had arisen his principal
enjoyments. To his wife he was very little otherwise indebted, than as
the sort of happiness which a man would in general wish to owe to his
wife; but where other powers of entertainment are wanting, the true
Elizabeth, however, had never been blind to the impropriety of her
father's behaviour as a husband. She had always seen it with pain; but
and decorum which, in exposing his wife to the contempt of her own
strongly as now the disadvantages which must attend the children of so
unsuitable a marriage, nor ever been so fully aware of the evils arising
might at least have preserved the respectability of his daughters, even
if incapable of enlarging the mind of his wife.
other cause for satisfaction in the loss of the regiment. Their parties
abroad were less varied than before, and at home she had a mother and
sister whose constant repinings at the dullness of everything around
them threw a real gloom over their domestic circle; and, though Kitty
might in time regain her natural degree of sense, since the disturbers
of her brain were removed, her other sister, from whose disposition
watering-place and a camp. Upon the whole, therefore, she found, what
looking with impatient desire did not, in taking place, bring all the
name some other period for the commencement of actual felicity--to have
some other point on which her wishes and hopes might be fixed, and by
again enjoying the pleasure of anticipation, console herself for the
present, and prepare for another disappointment. Her tour to the Lakes
was now the object of her happiest thoughts; it was her best consolation
for all the uncomfortable hours which the discontentedness of her mother
and Kitty made inevitable; and could she have included Jane in the
Were the whole arrangement complete, my disappointment would be certain.
the defence of some little peculiar vexation.”
to her mother and Kitty; but her letters were always long expected, and
always very short. Those to her mother contained little else than that
they were just returned from the library, where such and such officers
had attended them, and where she had seen such beautiful ornaments as
violent hurry, as Mrs. Forster called her, and they were going off to
the camp; and from her correspondence with her sister, there was still
less to be learnt--for her letters to Kitty, though rather longer, were
much too full of lines under the words to be made public.
After the first fortnight or three weeks of her absence, health, good
a happier aspect. The families who had been in town for the winter came
was restored to her usual querulous serenity; and, by the middle of
the following Christmas she might be so tolerably reasonable as not to
arrangement at the War Office, another regiment should be quartered in
The time fixed for the beginning of their northern tour was now fast
within a month, and as that left too short a period for them to go so
far, and see so much as they had proposed, or at least to see it with
the leisure and comfort they had built on, they were obliged to give up
the Lakes, and substitute a more contracted tour, and, according to the
present plan, were to go no farther northwards than Derbyshire. In that
county there was enough to be seen to occupy the chief of their three
they were now to spend a few days, was probably as great an object of
her curiosity as all the celebrated beauties of Matlock, Chatsworth,
Dovedale, or the Peak.
the Lakes, and still thought there might have been time enough. But it
With the mention of Derbyshire there were many ideas connected. It was
impossible for her to see the word without thinking of Pemberley and its
before her uncle and aunt's arrival. But they did pass away, and Mr.
and Mrs. Gardiner, with their four children, did at length appear at
younger boys, were to be left under the particular care of their
cousin Jane, who was the general favourite, and whose steady sense and
sweetness of temper exactly adapted her for attending to them in every
way--teaching them, playing with them, and loving them.
The Gardiners stayed only one night at Longbourn, and set off the
and intelligence, which might supply it among themselves if there were
It is not the object of this work to give a description of Derbyshire,
nor of any of the remarkable places through which their route thither
sufficiently known. A small part of Derbyshire is all the present
concern. To the little town of Lambton, the scene of Mrs. Gardiner's
still remained, they bent their steps, after having seen all the
principal wonders of the country; and within five miles of Lambton,
in their direct road, nor more than a mile or two out of it. In
talking over their route the evening before, Mrs. Gardiner expressed
an inclination to see the place again. Mr. Gardiner declared his
acquaintances are connected. Wickham passed all his youth there, you
the grounds are delightful. They have some of the finest woods in the
possibility of meeting Mr. Darcy, while viewing the place, instantly
occurred. It would be dreadful! She blushed at the very idea, and
a risk. But against this there were objections; and she finally resolved
that it could be the last resource, if her private inquiries to the
absence of the family were unfavourably answered.
Accordingly, when she retired at night, she asked the chambermaid
whether Pemberley were not a very fine place? what was the name of its
proprietor? and, with no little alarm, whether the family were down for
the summer? A most welcome negative followed the last question--and her
curiosity to see the house herself; and when the subject was revived the
to the scheme. To Pemberley, therefore, they were to go.
Elizabeth, as they drove along, watched for the first appearance of
Pemberley Woods with some perturbation; and when at length they turned
in at the lodge, her spirits were in a high flutter.
half-a-mile, and then found themselves at the top of a considerable
eminence, where the wood ceased, and the eye was instantly caught by
Pemberley House, situated on the opposite side of a valley, into which
the road with some abruptness wound. It was a large, handsome stone
were neither formal nor falsely adorned. Elizabeth was delighted. She
all of them warm in their admiration; and at that moment she felt that
They descended the hill, crossed the bridge, and drove to the door; and,
while examining the nearer aspect of the house, all her apprehension of
meeting its owner returned. She dreaded lest the chambermaid had been
mistaken. On applying to see the place, they were admitted into the
hall; and Elizabeth, as they waited for the housekeeper, had leisure to
followed her into the dining-parlour. It was a large, well proportioned
they had descended, receiving increased abruptness from the distance,
was a beautiful object. Every disposition of the ground was good; and
she looked on the whole scene, the river, the trees scattered on its
banks and the winding of the valley, as far as she could trace it,
with delight. As they passed into other rooms these objects were taking
different positions; but from every window there were beauties to be
seen. The rooms were lofty and handsome, and their furniture suitable to
the fortune of its proprietor; but Elizabeth saw, with admiration of
his taste, that it was neither gaudy nor uselessly fine; with less of
splendour, and more real elegance, than the furniture of Rosings.
these rooms I might now have been familiarly acquainted! Instead of
viewing them as a stranger, I might have rejoiced in them as my own, and
welcomed to them as visitors my uncle and aunt. But no,”--recollecting
me; I should not have been allowed to invite them.”
She longed to inquire of the housekeeper whether her master was really
absent, but had not the courage for it. At length however, the question
a large party of friends.” How rejoiced was Elizabeth that their own
Her aunt now called her to look at a picture. She approached and saw the
likeness of Mr. Wickham, suspended, amongst several other miniatures,
over the mantelpiece. Her aunt asked her, smilingly, how she liked it.
The housekeeper came forward, and told them it was a picture of a young
gentleman, the son of her late master's steward, who had been brought
up by him at his own expense. “He is now gone into the army,” she added;
“And that,” said Mrs. Reynolds, pointing to another of the miniatures,
“is my master--and very like him. It was drawn at the same time as the
other--about eight years ago.”
looking at the picture; “it is a handsome face. But, Lizzy, you can tell
us whether it is like or not.”
“I am sure I know none so handsome; but in the gallery up stairs you
master's favourite room, and these miniatures are just as they used to
be then. He was very fond of them.”
This accounted to Elizabeth for Mr. Wickham's being among them.
Mrs. Reynolds then directed their attention to one of Miss Darcy, drawn
“And is Miss Darcy as handsome as her brother?” said Mrs. Gardiner.
“Oh! yes--the handsomest young lady that ever was seen; and so
accomplished!--She plays and sings all day long. In the next room is
communicativeness by his questions and remarks; Mrs. Reynolds, either
“Is your master much at Pemberley in the course of the year?”
time here; and Miss Darcy is always down for the summer months.”
“I say no more than the truth, and everybody will say that knows him,”
 replied the other. Elizabeth thought this was going pretty far; and she
listened with increasing astonishment as the housekeeper added, “I have
This was praise, of all others most extraordinary, most opposite to her
“Yes, sir, I know I am. If I were to go through the world, I could
not meet with a better. But I have always observed, that they who are
good-natured when children, are good-natured when they grow up; and
he was always the sweetest-tempered, most generous-hearted boy in the
“His father was an excellent man,” said Mrs. Gardiner.
as affable to the poor.”
Reynolds could interest her on no other point. She related the subjects
of the pictures, the dimensions of the rooms, and the price of the
furniture, in vain. Mr. Gardiner, highly amused by the kind of family
master, soon led again to the subject; and she dwelt with energy on his
many merits as they proceeded together up the great staircase.
“He is the best landlord, and the best master,” said she, “that ever
lived; not like the wild young men nowadays, who think of nothing but
themselves. There is not one of his tenants or servants but will give
like other young men.”
“This fine account of him,” whispered her aunt as they walked, “is not
On reaching the spacious lobby above they were shown into a very pretty
the apartments below; and were informed that it was but just done to
give pleasure to Miss Darcy, who had taken a liking to the room when
“He is certainly a good brother,” said Elizabeth, as she walked towards
one of the windows.
the room. “And this is always the way with him,” she added. “Whatever
The picture-gallery, and two or three of the principal bedrooms, were
all that remained to be shown. In the former were many good paintings;
but Elizabeth knew nothing of the art; and from such as had been already
In the gallery there were many family portraits, but they could have
little to fix the attention of a stranger. Elizabeth walked in quest of
the only face whose features would be known to her. At last it arrested
smile over the face as she remembered to have sometimes seen when he
looked at her. She stood several minutes before the picture, in earnest
contemplation, and returned to it again before they quitted the gallery.
Mrs. Reynolds informed them that it had been taken in his father's
sensation towards the original than she had ever felt at the height of
their acquaintance. The commendation bestowed on him by Mrs. Reynolds
was of no trifling nature. What praise is more valuable than the praise
of an intelligent servant? As a brother, a landlord, a master, she
forward by the housekeeper was favourable to his character, and as she
stood before the canvas on which he was represented, and fixed his
When all of the house that was open to general inspection had been seen,
they returned downstairs, and, taking leave of the housekeeper, were
consigned over to the gardener, who met them at the hall-door.
As they walked across the hall towards the river, Elizabeth turned back
to look again; her uncle and aunt stopped also, and while the former
was conjecturing as to the date of the building, the owner of it himself
suddenly came forward from the road, which led behind it to the stables.
They were within twenty yards of each other, and so abrupt was his
instantly met, and the cheeks of both were overspread with the deepest
surprise; but shortly recovering himself, advanced towards the party,
overcome. Had his first appearance, or his resemblance to the picture
they had just been examining, been insufficient to assure the other two
that they now saw Mr. Darcy, the gardener's expression of surprise, on
aloof while he was talking to their niece, who, astonished and confused,
she returned to his civil inquiries after her family. Amazed at the
alteration of his manner since they last parted, every sentence that
he uttered was increasing her embarrassment; and every idea of the
impropriety of her being found there recurring to her mind, the few
minutes in which they continued were some of the most uncomfortable in
to the time of her having left Longbourn, and of her having stayed in
Derbyshire, so often, and in so hurried a way, as plainly spoke the
The others then joined her, and expressed admiration of his figure; but
followed them in silence. She was overpowered by shame and vexation. Her
coming there was the most unfortunate, the most ill-judged thing in the
thus come a day before he was expected? Had they been only ten minutes
sooner, they should have been beyond the reach of his discrimination;
the perverseness of the meeting. And his behaviour, so strikingly
They had now entered a beautiful walk by the side of the water, and
reach of the woods to which they were approaching; but it was some time
mechanically to the repeated appeals of her uncle and aunt, and
seemed to direct her eyes to such objects as they pointed out, she
distinguished no part of the scene. Her thoughts were all fixed on that
one spot of Pemberley House, whichever it might be, where Mr. Darcy then
was. She longed to know what at the moment was passing in his mind--in
what manner he thought of her, and whether, in defiance of everything,
felt himself at ease; yet there had been _that_ in his voice which was
not like ease. Whether he had felt more of pain or of pleasure in
At length, however, the remarks of her companions on her absence of mind
aroused her, and she felt the necessity of appearing more like herself.
They entered the woods, and bidding adieu to the river for a while,
ascended some of the higher grounds; when, in spots where the opening of
the trees gave the eye power to wander, were many charming views of the
valley, the opposite hills, with the long range of woods overspreading
many, and occasionally part of the stream. Mr. Gardiner expressed a wish
of going round the whole park, but feared it might be beyond a walk.
With a triumphant smile they were told that it was ten miles round.
It settled the matter; and they pursued the accustomed circuit; which
brought them again, after some time, in a descent among hanging woods,
to the edge of the water, and one of its narrowest parts. They crossed
it by a simple bridge, in character with the general air of the scene;
it was a spot less adorned than any they had yet visited; and the
valley, here contracted into a glen, allowed room only for the stream,
and a narrow walk amidst the rough coppice-wood which bordered it.
Elizabeth longed to explore its windings; but when they had crossed the
bridge, and perceived their distance from the house, Mrs. Gardiner,
who was not a great walker, could go no farther, and thought only
of returning to the carriage as quickly as possible. Her niece was,
therefore, obliged to submit, and they took their way towards the house
on the opposite side of the river, in the nearest direction; but their
progress was slow, for Mr. Gardiner, though seldom able to indulge the
taste, was very fond of fishing, and was so much engaged in watching the
occasional appearance of some trout in the water, and talking to the
man about them, that he advanced but little. Whilst wandering on in this
slow manner, they were again surprised, and Elizabeth's astonishment
was quite equal to what it had been at first, by the sight of Mr. Darcy
approaching them, and at no great distance. The walk being here
less sheltered than on the other side, allowed them to see him before
they met. Elizabeth, however astonished, was at least more prepared
calmness, if he really intended to meet them. For a few moments, indeed,
she felt that he would probably strike into some other path. The idea
lasted while a turning in the walk concealed him from their view; the
turning past, he was immediately before them. With a glance, she saw
politeness, she began, as they met, to admire the beauty of the place;
but she had not got beyond the words “delightful,” and “charming,” when
her if she would do him the honour of introducing him to her friends.
and she could hardly suppress a smile at his being now seeking the
she, “when he knows who they are? He takes them now for people of
The introduction, however, was immediately made; and as she named their
it, and was not without the expectation of his decamping as fast as he
could from such disgraceful companions. That he was _surprised_ by the
so far from going away, turned back with them, and entered into
some relations for whom there was no need to blush. She listened most
attentively to all that passed between them, and gloried in every
invite him, with the greatest civility, to fish there as often as he
chose while he continued in the neighbourhood, offering at the same time
the stream where there was usually most sport. Mrs. Gardiner, who was
Elizabeth said nothing, but it gratified her exceedingly; the compliment
After walking some time in this way, the two ladies in front, the two
gentlemen behind, on resuming their places, after descending to
the brink of the river for the better inspection of some curious
water-plant, there chanced to be a little alteration. It originated
in Mrs. Gardiner, who, fatigued by the exercise of the morning, found
her husband's. Mr. Darcy took her place by her niece, and they walked on
together. After a short silence, the lady first spoke. She wished him
to know that she had been assured of his absence before she came to the
in the country.” He acknowledged the truth of it all, and said that
before the rest of the party with whom he had been travelling. “They
will join me early to-morrow,” he continued, “and among them are some
driven back to the time when Mr. Bingley's name had been the last
mentioned between them; and, if she might judge by his complexion, _his_
“There is also one other person in the party,” he continued after a
must be the work of her brother, and, without looking farther, it was
They now walked on in silence, each of them deep in thought. Elizabeth
the highest kind. They soon outstripped the others, and when they had
reached the carriage, Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner were half a quarter of a
He then asked her to walk into the house--but she declared herself not
tired, and they stood together on the lawn. At such a time much might
there seemed to be an embargo on every subject. At last she recollected
that she had been travelling, and they talked of Matlock and Dove Dale
patience and her ideas were nearly worn out before the tete-a-tete was
over. On Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner's coming up they were all pressed to go
into the house and take some refreshment; but this was declined, and
they parted on each side with utmost politeness. Mr. Darcy handed the
ladies into the carriage; and when it drove off, Elizabeth saw him
walking slowly towards the house.
The observations of her uncle and aunt now began; and each of them
pronounced him to be infinitely superior to anything they had expected.
say with the housekeeper, that though some people may call him proud, I
than civil; it was really attentive; and there was no necessity for such
or, rather, he has not Wickham's countenance, for his features
him better when they had met in Kent than before, and that she had never
her uncle. “Your great men often are; and therefore I shall not take him
at his word, as he might change his mind another day, and warn me off
Elizabeth felt that they had entirely misunderstood his character, but
On the contrary, there is something pleasing about his mouth when he
speaks. And there is something of dignity in his countenance that would
not give one an unfavourable idea of his heart. But, to be sure, the
master, I suppose, and _that_ in the eye of a servant comprehends every
his behaviour to Wickham; and therefore gave them to understand, in
Wickham's so amiable, as they had been considered in Hertfordshire. In
confirmation of this, she related the particulars of all the pecuniary
transactions in which they had been connected, without actually naming
Mrs. Gardiner was surprised and concerned; but as they were now
approaching the scene of her former pleasures, every idea gave way to
the charm of recollection; and she was too much engaged in pointing out
to her husband all the interesting spots in its environs to think of
anything else. Fatigued as she had been by the morning's walk they
acquaintance, and the evening was spent in the satisfactions of a
The occurrences of the day were too full of interest to leave Elizabeth
much attention for any of these new friends; and she could do nothing
her the very day after her reaching Pemberley; and was consequently
resolved not to be out of sight of the inn the whole of that morning.
But her conclusion was false; for on the very morning after their
arrival at Lambton, these visitors came. They had been walking about the
place with some of their new friends, and were just returning to the inn
to dress themselves for dining with the same family, when the sound of a
carriage drew them to a window, and they saw a gentleman and a lady in
a curricle driving up the street. Elizabeth immediately recognizing
the livery, guessed what it meant, and imparted no small degree of her
surprise to her relations by acquainting them with the honour which she
expected. Her uncle and aunt were all amazement; and the embarrassment
of her manner as she spoke, joined to the circumstance itself, and many
of the circumstances of the preceding day, opened to them a new idea on
the business. Nothing had ever suggested it before, but they felt that
there was no other way of accounting for such attentions from such a
quarter than by supposing a partiality for their niece. While these
newly-born notions were passing in their heads, the perturbation of
amazed at her own discomposure; but amongst other causes of disquiet,
she dreaded lest the partiality of the brother should have said too much
She retreated from the window, fearful of being seen; and as she walked
up and down the room, endeavouring to compose herself, saw such looks of
Miss Darcy and her brother appeared, and this formidable introduction
but the observation of a very few minutes convinced her that she was
womanly and graceful. She was less handsome than her brother; but there
They had not long been together before Mr. Darcy told her that Bingley
step was heard on the stairs, and in a moment he entered the room. All
felt any, it could hardly have stood its ground against the unaffected
and spoke with the same good-humoured ease that he had ever done.
them, indeed, excited a lively attention. The suspicions which had just
arisen of Mr. Darcy and their niece directed their observation towards
each with an earnest though guarded inquiry; and they soon drew from
those inquiries the full conviction that one of them at least knew
what it was to love. Of the lady's sensations they remained a little
in doubt; but that the gentleman was overflowing with admiration was
Elizabeth, on her side, had much to do. She wanted to ascertain the
to make herself agreeable to all; and in the latter object, where she
how ardently did she long to know whether any of his were directed in
former occasions, and once or twice pleased herself with the notion
appeared on either side that spoke particular regard. Nothing occurred
between them that could justify the hopes of his sister. On this point
ere they parted, which, in her anxious interpretation, denoted a
more that might lead to the mention of her, had he dared. He observed
to her, at a moment when the others were talking together, and in a tone
he had had the pleasure of seeing her;” and, before she could reply,
he added, “It is above eight months. We have not met since the 26th of
November, when we were all dancing together at Netherfield.”
took occasion to ask her, when unattended to by any of the rest, whether
_all_ her sisters were at Longbourn. There was not much in the question,
nor in the preceding remark; but there was a look and a manner which
gave them meaning.
the improvement of manners which she had yesterday witnessed however
she saw him thus seeking the acquaintance and courting the good opinion
disgrace--when she saw him thus civil, not only to herself, but to the
very relations whom he had openly disdained, and recollected their last
lively scene in Hunsford Parsonage--the difference, the change was
restrain her astonishment from being visible. Never, even in the company
of his dear friends at Netherfield, or his dignified relations
could result from the success of his endeavours, and when even the
down the ridicule and censure of the ladies both of Netherfield and
Their visitors stayed with them above half-an-hour; and when they arose
their wish of seeing Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner, and Miss Bennet, to dinner
at Pemberley, before they left the country. Miss Darcy, though with a
diffidence which marked her little in the habit of giving invitations,
how _she_, whom the invitation most concerned, felt disposed as to its
that this studied avoidance spoke rather a momentary embarrassment than
any dislike of the proposal, and seeing in her husband, who was fond of
her attendance, and the day after the next was fixed on.
Bingley expressed great pleasure in the certainty of seeing Elizabeth
make after all their Hertfordshire friends. Elizabeth, construing all
this account, as well as some others, found herself, when their
visitors left them, capable of considering the last half-hour with some
satisfaction, though while it was passing, the enjoyment of it had been
uncle and aunt, she stayed with them only long enough to hear their
favourable opinion of Bingley, and then hurried away to dress.
not their wish to force her communication. It was evident that she was
much better acquainted with Mr. Darcy than they had before any idea of;
as their acquaintance reached, there was no fault to find. They could
not be untouched by his politeness; and had they drawn his character
from their own feelings and his servant's report, without any reference
to any other account, the circle in Hertfordshire to which he was known
however, in believing the housekeeper; and they soon became sensible
that the authority of a servant who had known him since he was four
hastily rejected. Neither had anything occurred in the intelligence of
their Lambton friends that could materially lessen its weight. They had
it would certainly be imputed by the inhabitants of a small market-town
where the family did not visit. It was acknowledged, however, that he
was a liberal man, and did much good among the poor.
With respect to Wickham, the travellers soon found that he was not held
there in much estimation; for though the chief of his concerns with the
the last; and the evening, though as it passed it seemed long, was not
and she lay awake two whole hours endeavouring to make them out. She
that could be so called. The respect created by the conviction of his
into somewhat of a friendlier nature, by the testimony so highly in
there was a motive within her of goodwill which could not be overlooked.
but for loving her still well enough to forgive all the petulance and
acrimony of her manner in rejecting him, and all the unjust accusations
eager to preserve the acquaintance, and without any indelicate display
of regard, or any peculiarity of manner, where their two selves only
were concerned, was soliciting the good opinion of her friends, and bent
be for the happiness of both that she should employ the power, which her
fancy told her she still possessed, of bringing on her the renewal of
It had been settled in the evening between the aunt and the niece, that
such a striking civility as Miss Darcy's in coming to see them on the
by some exertion of politeness on their side; and, consequently, that
it would be highly expedient to wait on her at Pemberley the following
morning. They were, therefore, to go. Elizabeth was pleased; though when
she asked herself the reason, she had very little to say in reply.
Mr. Gardiner left them soon after breakfast. The fishing scheme had been
renewed the day before, and a positive engagement made of his meeting
some of the gentlemen at Pemberley before noon.
much civility on that lady's side the acquaintance would now be renewed.
On reaching the house, they were shown through the hall into the saloon,
whose northern aspect rendered it delightful for summer. Its windows
opening to the ground, admitted a most refreshing view of the high woody
hills behind the house, and of the beautiful oaks and Spanish chestnuts
which were scattered over the intermediate lawn.
In this house they were received by Miss Darcy, who was sitting there
with Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley, and the lady with whom she lived in
London. Georgiana's reception of them was very civil, but attended with
all the embarrassment which, though proceeding from shyness and the fear
of doing wrong, would easily give to those who felt themselves inferior
the belief of her being proud and reserved. Mrs. Gardiner and her niece,
By Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley they were noticed only by a curtsey; and,
on their being seated, a pause, awkward as such pauses must always be,
of discourse proved her to be more truly well-bred than either of the
others; and between her and Mrs. Gardiner, with occasional help from
Elizabeth, the conversation was carried on. Miss Darcy looked as if she
short sentence when there was least danger of its being heard.
from trying to talk to the latter, had they not been seated at an
inconvenient distance; but she was not sorry to be spared the necessity
moment that some of the gentlemen would enter the room. She wished, she
feared that the master of the house might be amongst them; and whether
inquiry after the health of her family. She answered with equal
indifference and brevity, and the other said no more.
The next variation which their visit afforded was produced by the
entrance of servants with cold meat, cake, and a variety of all the
given, to remind her of her post. There was now employment for the whole
party--for though they could not all talk, they could all eat; and the
them round the table.
While thus engaged, Elizabeth had a fair opportunity of deciding whether
she most feared or wished for the appearance of Mr. Darcy, by the
feelings which prevailed on his entering the room; and then, though but
He had been some time with Mr. Gardiner, who, with two or three other
gentlemen from the house, was engaged by the river, and had left him
only on learning that the ladies of the family intended a visit to
resolved to be perfectly easy and unembarrassed; a resolution the more
necessary to be made, but perhaps not the more easily kept, because she
saw that the suspicions of the whole party were awakened against them,
and that there was scarcely an eye which did not watch his behaviour
when he first came into the room. In no countenance was attentive
curiosity so strongly marked as in Miss Bingley's, in spite of the
to Mr. Darcy were by no means over. Miss Darcy, on her brother's
as much as possible, every attempt at conversation on either side. Miss
Bingley saw all this likewise; and, in the imprudence of anger, took the
“Pray, Miss Eliza, are not the ----shire Militia removed from Meryton?
instantly comprehended that he was uppermost in her thoughts; and the
but exerting herself vigorously to repel the ill-natured attack, she
presently answered the question in a tolerably detached tone. While
pain she was then giving her beloved friend, she undoubtedly would
have refrained from the hint; but she had merely intended to discompose
Elizabeth by bringing forward the idea of a man to whom she believed
Darcy's opinion, and, perhaps, to remind the latter of all the follies
her brother was particularly anxious to conceal it, from the very
wish which Elizabeth had long ago attributed to him, of their becoming
for the welfare of his friend.
to speak any more. Her brother, whose eye she feared to meet, scarcely
recollected her interest in the affair, and the very circumstance which
fixed them on her more and more cheerfully.
Their visit did not continue long after the question and answer above
mentioned; and while Mr. Darcy was attending them to their carriage Miss
behaviour, and dress. But Georgiana would not join her. Her brother's
without the power of finding her otherwise than lovely and amiable. When
Darcy returned to the saloon, Miss Bingley could not help repeating to
the winter. She is grown so brown and coarse! Louisa and I were agreeing
himself with coolly replying that he perceived no other alteration than
her being rather tanned, no miraculous consequence of travelling in the
wants character--there is nothing marked in its lines. Her teeth are
tolerable, but not out of the common way; and as for her eyes,
extraordinary in them. They have a sharp, shrewish look, which I do
not like at all; and in her air altogether there is a self-sufficiency
the best method of recommending herself; but angry people are not always
wise; and in seeing him at last look somewhat nettled, she had all the
your saying one night, after they had been dining at Netherfield, '_She_
a beauty!--I should as soon call her mother a wit.' But afterwards she
seemed to improve on you, and I believe you thought her rather pretty at
considered her as one of the handsomest women of my acquaintance.”
He then went away, and Miss Bingley was left to all the satisfaction of
Mrs. Gardiner and Elizabeth talked of all that had occurred during their
visit, as they returned, except what had particularly interested them
both. The look and behaviour of everybody they had seen were discussed,
except of the person who had mostly engaged their attention. They talked
beginning the subject.
Jane on their first arrival at Lambton; and this disappointment had been
renewed on each of the mornings that had now been spent there; but
on the third her repining was over, and her sister justified, by the
Jane had written the direction remarkably ill.
They had just been preparing to walk as the letters came in; and
her uncle and aunt, leaving her to enjoy them in quiet, set off by
themselves. The one missent must first be attended to; it had been
written five days ago. The beginning contained an account of all their
little parties and engagements, with such news as the country afforded;
but the latter half, which was dated a day later, and written in evident
“Since writing the above, dearest Lizzy, something has occurred of a
with one of his officers; to own the truth, with Wickham! Imagine our
to hope the best, and that his character has been misunderstood.
disinterested at least, for he must know my father can give her nothing.
Our poor mother is sadly grieved. My father bears it better. How
thankful am I that we never let them know what has been said against
eight. The express was sent off directly. My dear Lizzy, they must have
their intention. I must conclude, for I cannot be long from my poor
mother. I am afraid you will not be able to make it out, but I hardly
what she felt, Elizabeth on finishing this letter instantly seized the
other, and opening it with the utmost impatience, read as follows: it
had been written a day later than the conclusion of the first.
and it cannot be delayed. Imprudent as the marriage between Mr. Wickham
taken place, for there is but too much reason to fear they are not gone
to Scotland. Colonel Forster came yesterday, having left Brighton the
day before, not many hours after the express. Though Lydia's short
letter to Mrs. F. gave them to understand that they were going to Gretna
never intended to go there, or to marry Lydia at all, which was
repeated to Colonel F., who, instantly taking the alarm, set off from B.
intending to trace their route. He did trace them easily to Clapham,
but no further; for on entering that place, they removed into a hackney
coach, and dismissed the chaise that brought them from Epsom. All that
is known after this is, that they were seen to continue the London road.
them at all the turnpikes, and at the inns in Barnet and Hatfield, but
the kindest concern he came on to Longbourn, and broke his apprehensions
for him and Mrs. F., but no one can throw any blame on them. Our
distress, my dear Lizzy, is very great. My father and mother believe the
it more eligible for them to be married privately in town than to pursue
their first plan; and even if _he_ could form such a design against a
Colonel F. is not disposed to depend upon their marriage; he shook his
be trusted. My poor mother is really ill, and keeps her room. Could she
as to my father, I never in my life saw him so affected. Poor Kitty has
anger for having concealed their attachment; but as it was a matter of
have been spared something of these distressing scenes; but now, as the
more to ask of the former. My father is going to London with Colonel
measure in the best and safest way, and Colonel Forster is obliged to
uncle's advice and assistance would be everything in the world; he will
as she finished the letter, in eagerness to follow him, without losing
a moment of the time so precious; but as she reached the door it was
“Good God! what is the matter?” cried he, with more feeling than
politeness; then recollecting himself, “I will not detain you a minute;
but let me, or let the servant go after Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner. You are
little would be gained by her attempting to pursue them. Calling back
the servant, therefore, she commissioned him, though in so breathless
On his quitting the room she sat down, unable to support herself, and
“Let me call your maid. Is there nothing you could take to give you
is nothing the matter with me. I am quite well; I am only distressed by
not speak another word. Darcy, in wretched suspense, could only say
the power of--of Mr. Wickham. They are gone off together from Brighton.
_You_ know him too well to doubt the rest. She has no money, no
“Oh, yes! They left Brighton together on Sunday night, and were traced
almost to London, but not beyond; they are certainly not gone to
“My father is gone to London, and Jane has written to beg my uncle's
such a man to be worked on? How are they even to be discovered? I have
not the smallest hope. It is every way horrible!”
up and down the room in earnest meditation, his brow contracted, his air
weakness, such an assurance of the deepest disgrace. She could neither
wonder nor condemn, but the belief of his self-conquest brought nothing
was, on the contrary, exactly calculated to make her understand her own
But self, though it would intrude, could not engross her. Lydia--the
humiliation, the misery she was bringing on them all, soon swallowed
the voice of her companion, who, in a manner which, though it spoke
could be either said or done on my part that might offer consolation to
fear, prevent my sister's having the pleasure of seeing you at Pemberley
urgent business calls us home immediately. Conceal the unhappy truth as
her distress, wished it a happier conclusion than there was at present
As he quitted the room, Elizabeth felt how improbable it was that they
should ever see each other again on such terms of cordiality as
had marked their several meetings in Derbyshire; and as she threw a
retrospective glance over the whole of their acquaintance, so full
of contradictions and varieties, sighed at the perverseness of those
change of sentiment will be neither improbable nor faulty. But if
otherwise--if regard springing from such sources is unreasonable or
somewhat of a trial to the latter method in her partiality for Wickham,
and that its ill success might, perhaps, authorise her to seek the other
could flatter herself with such an expectation. Surprise was the least
of her feelings on this development. While the contents of the first
Lydia to be deliberately engaging in an elopement without the intention
of marriage, she had no difficulty in believing that neither her virtue
She had never perceived, while the regiment was in Hertfordshire, that
officer, sometimes another, had been her favourite, as their attentions
raised them in her opinion. Her affections had continually been
She was wild to be at home--to hear, to see, to be upon the spot to
share with Jane in the cares that must now fall wholly upon her, in a
family so deranged, a father absent, a mother incapable of exertion, and
could be done for Lydia, her uncle's interference seemed of the utmost
importance, and till he entered the room her impatience was severe. Mr.
and Mrs. Gardiner had hurried back in alarm, supposing by the servant's
account that their niece was taken suddenly ill; but satisfying them
instantly on that head, she eagerly communicated the cause of their
summons, reading the two letters aloud, and dwelling on the postscript
of the last with trembling energy.--Though Lydia had never been a
favourite with them, Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner could not but be deeply
afflicted. Not Lydia only, but all were concerned in it; and after the
everything relating to their journey was speedily settled. They were to
“What is all settled?” repeated the other, as she ran into her room to
prepare. “And are they upon such terms as for her to disclose the real
But wishes were vain, or at least could only serve to amuse her in the
hurry and confusion of the following hour. Had Elizabeth been at leisure
business as well as her aunt, and amongst the rest there were notes to
be written to all their friends at Lambton, with false excuses for their
sudden departure. An hour, however, saw the whole completed; and Mr.
Gardiner meanwhile having settled his account at the inn, nothing
remained to be done but to go; and Elizabeth, after all the misery of
the morning, found herself, in a shorter space of time than she could
have supposed, seated in the carriage, and on the road to Longbourn.
“I have been thinking it over again, Elizabeth,” said her uncle, as they
drove from the town; “and really, upon serious consideration, I am much
more inclined than I was to judge as your eldest sister does on the
am strongly inclined to hope the best. Could he expect that her friends
would not step forward? Could he expect to be noticed again by the
not adequate to the risk!”
“Not, perhaps, of neglecting his own interest; but of every other
dare not hope it. Why should they not go on to Scotland if that had been
the case?”
“In the first place,” replied Mr. Gardiner, “there is no absolute proof
that they are not gone to Scotland.”
“Oh! but their removing from the chaise into a hackney coach is such
a presumption! And, besides, no traces of them were to be found on the
“Well, then--supposing them to be in London. They may be there, though
for the purpose of concealment, for no more exceptional purpose. It is
not likely that money should be very abundant on either side; and it
might strike them that they could be more economically, though less
“But why all this secrecy? Why any fear of detection? Why must their
restraint the apprehensions of disgrace in the corps might throw on a
nothing of the effects that such a step might produce. But as to your
other objection, I am afraid it will hardly hold good. Lydia has
no brothers to step forward; and he might imagine, from my father's
behaviour, from his indolence and the little attention he has ever
do as little, and think as little about it, as any father could do, in
as to consent to live with him on any terms other than marriage?”
been taught to think on serious subjects; and for the last half-year,
and vanity. She has been allowed to dispose of her time in the most idle
Since the ----shire were first quartered in Meryton, nothing but love,
everything in her power by thinking and talking on the subject, to give
Wickham as to believe him capable of the attempt.”
“Of whom does Jane ever think ill? And who is there, whatever might be
their former conduct, that she would think capable of such an attempt,
till it were proved against them? But Jane knows, as well as I do, what
sense of the word; that he has neither integrity nor honour; that he is
as to the mode of her intelligence was all alive.
“I do indeed,” replied Elizabeth, colouring. “I told you, the other day,
Longbourn, heard in what manner he spoke of the man who had behaved
with such forbearance and liberality towards him. And there are other
relate; but his lies about the whole Pemberley family are endless. From
reserved, disagreeable girl. Yet he knew to the contrary himself. He
“Oh, yes!--that, that is the worst of all. Till I was in Kent, and saw
ignorant of the truth myself. And when I returned home, the ----shire
was to leave Meryton in a week or fortnight's time. As that was the
case, neither Jane, to whom I related the whole, nor I, thought it
it apparently be to any one, that the good opinion which all the
neighbourhood had of him should then be overthrown? And even when it was
settled that Lydia should go with Mrs. Forster, the necessity of opening
in any danger from the deception never entered my head. That such a
“When they all removed to Brighton, therefore, you had no reason, I
suppose, to believe them fond of each other?”
“Not the slightest. I can remember no symptom of affection on either
side; and had anything of the kind been perceptible, you must be aware
he entered the corps, she was ready enough to admire him; but so we all
the first two months; but he never distinguished _her_ by any particular
wild admiration, her fancy for him gave way, and others of the regiment,
to their fears, hopes, and conjectures, on this interesting subject, by
its repeated discussion, no other could detain them from it long, during
the whole of the journey. From Elizabeth's thoughts it was never absent.
Fixed there by the keenest of all anguish, self-reproach, she could find
on the road, reached Longbourn by dinner time the next day. It was a
The little Gardiners, attracted by the sight of a chaise, were standing
on the steps of the house as they entered the paddock; and, when the
carriage drove up to the door, the joyful surprise that lighted up their
faces, and displayed itself over their whole bodies, in a variety of
capers and frisks, was the first pleasing earnest of their welcome.
Elizabeth jumped out; and, after giving each of them a hasty kiss,
hurried into the vestibule, where Jane, who came running down from her
mother's apartment, immediately met her.
Elizabeth, as she affectionately embraced her, whilst tears filled the
eyes of both, lost not a moment in asking whether anything had been
heard of the fugitives.
“Is my father in town?”
“And my mother--how is she? How are you all?”
“My mother is tolerably well, I trust; though her spirits are greatly
Her sister, however, assured her of her being perfectly well; and their
engaged with their children, was now put an end to by the approach
of the whole party. Jane ran to her uncle and aunt, and welcomed and
thanked them both, with alternate smiles and tears.
When they were all in the drawing-room, the questions which Elizabeth
had already asked were of course repeated by the others, and they soon
good, however, which the benevolence of her heart suggested had not yet
every morning would bring some letter, either from Lydia or her father,
to explain their proceedings, and, perhaps, announce their marriage.
Mrs. Bennet, to whose apartment they all repaired, after a few minutes'
conversation together, received them exactly as might be expected; with
tears and lamentations of regret, invectives against the villainous
blaming everybody but the person to whose ill-judging indulgence the
had nobody to take care of her. Why did the Forsters ever let her go out
of their sight? I am sure there was some great neglect or other on their
side, for she is not the kind of girl to do such a thing if she had been
well looked after. I always thought they were very unfit to have the
wherever he meets him and then he will be killed, and what is to become
grave, and if you are not kind to us, brother, I do not know what we
that he meant to be in London the very next day, and would assist Mr.
prepared for the worst, there is no occasion to look on it as certain.
It is not quite a week since they left Brighton. In a few days more we
may gain some news of them; and till we know that they are not married,
and have no design of marrying, do not let us give the matter over as
lost. As soon as I get to town I shall go to my brother, and make
him come home with me to Gracechurch Street; and then we may consult
together as to what is to be done.”
“Oh! my dear brother,” replied Mrs. Bennet, “that is exactly what I
could most wish for. And now do, when you get to town, find them out,
wherever they may be; and if they are not married already, _make_ them
marry. And as for wedding clothes, do not let them wait for that, but
tell Lydia she shall have as much money as she chooses to buy them,
after they are married. And, above all, keep Mr. Bennet from fighting.
give any directions about her clothes till she has seen me, for she does
not know which are the best warehouses. Oh, brother, how kind you are! I
in the cause, could not avoid recommending moderation to her, as well
dinner was on the table, they all left her to vent all her feelings on
the housekeeper, who attended in the absence of her daughters.
Though her brother and sister were persuaded that there was no real
occasion for such a seclusion from the family, they did not attempt to
oppose it, for they knew that she had not prudence enough to hold her
tongue before the servants, while they waited at table, and judged it
better that _one_ only of the household, and the one whom they could
most trust should comprehend all her fears and solicitude on the
In the dining-room they were soon joined by Mary and Kitty, who had been
too busily engaged in their separate apartments to make their appearance
before. One came from her books, and the other from her toilette. The
in either, except that the loss of her favourite sister, or the anger
fretfulness than usual to the accents of Kitty. As for Mary, she was
of grave reflection, soon after they were seated at table:
But we must stem the tide of malice, and pour into the wounded bosoms of
each other the balm of sisterly consolation.”
“Unhappy as the event must be for Lydia, we may draw from it this useful
her behaviour towards the undeserving of the other sex.”
kind of moral extractions from the evil before them.
In the afternoon, the two elder Miss Bennets were able to be for
half-an-hour by themselves; and Elizabeth instantly availed herself of
the opportunity of making any inquiries, which Jane was equally eager to
satisfy. After joining in general lamentations over the dreadful sequel
Bennet could not assert to be wholly impossible, the former continued
the subject, by saying, “But tell me all and everything about it which
I have not already heard. Give me further particulars. What did Colonel
Forster say? Had they no apprehension of anything before the elopement
took place? They must have seen them together for ever.”
grieved for him! His behaviour was attentive and kind to the utmost. He
any idea of their not being gone to Scotland: when that apprehension
their intending to go off? Had Colonel Forster seen Denny himself?”
their plans, and would not give his real opinion about it. He did not
repeat his persuasion of their not marrying--and from _that_, I am
doubt, I suppose, of their being really married?”
right. My father and mother knew nothing of that; they only felt how
imprudent a match it must be. Kitty then owned, with a very natural
triumph on knowing more than the rest of us, that in Lydia's last letter
she had prepared her for such a step. She had known, it seems, of their
being in love with each other, many weeks.”
“But not before they went to Brighton?”
the former faults of any person without knowing what their present
feelings were, seemed unjustifiable. We acted with the best intentions.”
“Could Colonel Forster repeat the particulars of Lydia's note to his
Jane then took it from her pocket-book, and gave it to Elizabeth. These
were the contents:
I shall think you a simpleton, for there is but one man in the world I
it no harm to be off. You need not send them word at Longbourn of my
going, if you do not like it, for it will make the surprise the greater,
when I write to them and sign my name 'Lydia Wickham.' What a good joke
dance with him at the next ball we meet, with great pleasure. I shall
send for my clothes when I get to Longbourn; but I wish you would tell
Sally to mend a great slit in my worked muslin gown before they are
But at least it shows that _she_ was serious on the subject of their
side a _scheme_ of infamy. My poor father! how he must have felt it!”
minutes. My mother was taken ill immediately, and the whole house in
“Oh! Jane,” cried Elizabeth, “was there a servant belonging to it who
did not know the whole story before the end of the day?”
“I do not know. I hope there was. But to be guarded at such a time is
very difficult. My mother was in hysterics, and though I endeavoured to
much as I might have done! But the horror of what might possibly happen
fatigue, I am sure; but I did not think it right for either of them.
on Tuesday, after my father went away; and was so good as to stay till
they should be of use to us.”
insufferable. Let them triumph over us at a distance, and be satisfied.”
She then proceeded to inquire into the measures which her father had
intended to pursue, while in town, for the recovery of his daughter.
“He meant I believe,” replied Jane, “to go to Epsom, the place where
they last changed horses, see the postilions and try if anything could
be made out from them. His principal object must be to discover the
number of the hackney coach which took them from Clapham. It had come
with a fare from London; and as he thought that the circumstance of a
gentleman and lady's removing from one carriage into another might
discover at what house the coachman had before set down his fare, he
determined to make inquiries there, and hoped it might not be impossible
to find out the stand and number of the coach. I do not know of any
other designs that he had formed; but he was in such a hurry to be gone,
The whole party were in hopes of a letter from Mr. Bennet the next
morning, but the post came in without bringing a single line from him.
dilatory correspondent; but at such a time they had hoped for exertion.
send; but even of _that_ they would have been glad to be certain. Mr.
Gardiner had waited only for the letters before he set off.
When he was gone, they were certain at least of receiving constant
information of what was going on, and their uncle promised, at parting,
to the great consolation of his sister, who considered it as the only
Mrs. Gardiner and the children were to remain in Hertfordshire a few
days longer, as the former thought her presence might be serviceable
to her nieces. She shared in their attendance on Mrs. Bennet, and was a
great comfort to them in their hours of freedom. Their other aunt also
visited them frequently, and always, as she said, with the design of
cheering and heartening them up--though, as she never came without
she seldom went away without leaving them more dispirited than she found
them.
All Meryton seemed striving to blacken the man who, but three months
to every tradesman in the place, and his intrigues, all honoured with
the title of seduction, had been extended into every tradesman's family.
Everybody declared that he was the wickedest young man in the world;
and everybody began to find out that they had always distrusted the
of it, became almost hopeless, more especially as the time was now come
when, if they had gone to Scotland, which she had never before entirely
despaired of, they must in all probability have gained some news of
them.
letter from him; it told them that, on his arrival, he had immediately
found out his brother, and persuaded him to come to Gracechurch Street;
determined to inquire at all the principal hotels in town, as Mr. Bennet
thought it possible they might have gone to one of them, on their first
coming to London, before they procured lodgings. Mr. Gardiner himself
did not expect any success from this measure, but as his brother was
possible, from some of the young man's intimates in the regiment,
whether Wickham has any relations or connections who would be likely to
know in what part of town he has now concealed himself. If there were
other person.”
of so satisfactory a nature as the compliment deserved. She had never
heard of his having had any relations, except a father and mother, both
his companions in the ----shire might be able to give more information;
and though she was not very sanguine in expecting it, the application
Every day at Longbourn was now a day of anxiety; but the most anxious
part of each was when the post was expected. The arrival of letters
was the grand object of every morning's impatience. Through letters,
But before they heard again from Mr. Gardiner, a letter arrived for
their father, from a different quarter, from Mr. Collins; which, as Jane
in life, to condole with you on the grievous affliction you are now
your present distress, which must be of the bitterest kind, because
may comfort you, under a circumstance that must be of all others the
have been a blessing in comparison of this. And it is the more to
be lamented, because there is reason to suppose as my dear Charlotte
proceeded from a faulty degree of indulgence; though, at the same time,
for the consolation of yourself and Mrs. Bennet, I am inclined to think
by Mrs. Collins, but likewise by Lady Catherine and her daughter, to
whom I have related the affair. They agree with me in apprehending that
this false step in one daughter will be injurious to the fortunes of
all the others; for who, as Lady Catherine herself condescendingly says,
will connect themselves with such a family? And this consideration leads
of last November; for had it been otherwise, I must have been involved
in all your sorrow and disgrace. Let me then advise you, dear sir, to
from your affection for ever, and leave her to reap the fruits of her
Colonel Forster; and then he had nothing of a pleasant nature to send.
had been in the militia, it did not appear that he was on terms of
particular friendship with any of them. There was no one, therefore,
who could be pointed out as likely to give any news of him. And in the
wretched state of his own finances, there was a very powerful motive for
formidable. Mr. Gardiner did not attempt to conceal these particulars
from the Longbourn family. Jane heard them with horror. “A gamester!”
Mr. Gardiner added in his letter, that they might expect to see their
father at home on the following day, which was Saturday. Rendered
spiritless by the ill-success of all their endeavours, he had yielded
to his brother-in-law's entreaty that he would return to his family, and
for continuing their pursuit. When Mrs. Bennet was told of this, she did
will not leave London before he has found them. Who is to fight Wickham,
and the children should go to London, at the same time that Mr. Bennet
came from it. The coach, therefore, took them the first stage of their
Mrs. Gardiner went away in all the perplexity about Elizabeth and her
Derbyshire friend that had attended her from that part of the world. His
name had never been voluntarily mentioned before them by her niece; and
the kind of half-expectation which Mrs. Gardiner had formed, of their
The present unhappy state of the family rendered any other excuse for
the lowness of her spirits unnecessary; nothing, therefore, could be
that, had she known nothing of Darcy, she could have borne the dread of
When Mr. Bennet arrived, he had all the appearance of his usual
philosophic composure. He said as little as he had ever been in the
habit of saying; made no mention of the business that had taken him
It was not till the afternoon, when he had joined them at tea, that
Elizabeth ventured to introduce the subject; and then, on her briefly
been to blame. I am not afraid of being overpowered by the impression.
“Do you suppose them to be in London?”
“Yes; where else can they be so well concealed?”
“She is happy then,” said her father drily; “and her residence there
last May, which, considering the event, shows some greatness of mind.”
They were interrupted by Miss Bennet, who came to fetch her mother's
elegance to misfortune! Another day I will do the same; I will sit in my
you will feel the effects of it. No officer is ever to enter into
my house again, nor even to pass through the village. Balls will be
Kitty, who took all these threats in a serious light, began to cry.
girl for the next ten years, I will take you to a review at the end of
them.”
together in the shrubbery behind the house, they saw the housekeeper
coming towards them, and, concluding that she came to call them to their
mother, went forward to meet her; but, instead of the expected summons,
when they approached her, she said to Miss Bennet, “I beg your pardon,
good news from town, so I took the liberty of coming to ask.”
there is an express come for master from Mr. Gardiner? He has been here
Away ran the girls, too eager to get in to have time for speech. They
ran through the vestibule into the breakfast-room; from thence to the
library; their father was in neither; and they were on the point of
seeking him up stairs with their mother, when they were met by the
“If you are looking for my master, ma'am, he is walking towards the
Upon this information, they instantly passed through the hall once
more, and ran across the lawn after their father, who was deliberately
pursuing his way towards a small wood on one side of the paddock.
Jane, who was not so light nor so much in the habit of running as
“What is there of good to be expected?” said he, taking the letter from
“Read it aloud,” said their father, “for I hardly know myself what it is
upon the whole, I hope it will give you satisfaction. Soon after you
London they were. The particulars I reserve till we meet; it is enough
to know they are discovered. I have seen them both--”
“Then it is as I always hoped,” cried Jane; “they are married!”
“I have seen them both. They are not married, nor can I find there
was any intention of being so; but if you are willing to perform the
not be long before they are. All that is required of you is, to assure
to your daughter, by settlement, her equal share of the five thousand
pounds secured among your children after the decease of yourself and
will easily comprehend, from these particulars, that Mr. Wickham's
circumstances are not so hopeless as they are generally believed to be.
The world has been deceived in that respect; and I am happy to say there
will be the case, you send me full powers to act in your name throughout
the whole of this business, I will immediately give directions to
Haggerston for preparing a proper settlement. There will not be the
smallest occasion for your coming to town again; therefore stay quiet at
“Wickham is not so undeserving, then, as we thought him,” said her
sister. “My dear father, I congratulate you.”
“And have you answered the letter?” cried Elizabeth.
Most earnestly did she then entreat him to lose no more time before he
“Oh! my dear father,” she cried, “come back and write immediately.
“Let me write for you,” said Jane, “if you dislike the trouble
And so saying, he turned back with them, and walked towards the house.
“And may I ask--” said Elizabeth; “but the terms, I suppose, must be
“And they _must_ marry! Yet he is _such_ a man!”
“Yes, yes, they must marry. There is nothing else to be done. But there
your uncle has laid down to bring it about; and the other, how am I ever
“No,” said her father; “Wickham's a fool if he takes her with a farthing
in the very beginning of our relationship.”
Mr. Bennet made no answer, and each of them, deep in thought, continued
silent till they reached the house. Their father then went on to the
library to write, and the girls walked into the breakfast-room.
“And they are really to be married!” cried Elizabeth, as soon as they
were by themselves. “How strange this is! And for _this_ we are to be
thankful. That they should marry, small as is their chance of happiness,
exactly know what Mr. Gardiner has done for them, because Wickham has
be requited. Their taking her home, and affording her their personal
actually with them! If such goodness does not make her miserable now,
“We must endeavour to forget all that has passed on either side,” said
Jane: “I hope and trust they will yet be happy. His consenting to
thinking. Their mutual affection will steady them; and I flatter myself
they will settle so quietly, and live in so rational a manner, as may in
time make their past imprudence forgotten.”
“Their conduct has been such,” replied Elizabeth, “as neither you, nor
It now occurred to the girls that their mother was in all likelihood
perfectly ignorant of what had happened. They went to the library,
therefore, and asked their father whether he would not wish them to make
Elizabeth took the letter from his writing-table, and they went up stairs
together. Mary and Kitty were both with Mrs. Bennet: one communication
would, therefore, do for all. After a slight preparation for good news,
the letter was read aloud. Mrs. Bennet could hardly contain herself. As
My good, kind brother! I knew how it would be. I knew he would manage
everything! How I long to see her! and to see dear Wickham too! But the
clothes, the wedding clothes! I will write to my sister Gardiner about
them directly. Lizzy, my dear, run down to your father, and ask him
how much he will give her. Stay, stay, I will go myself. Ring the bell,
Lydia! How merry we shall be together when we meet!”
Her eldest daughter endeavoured to give some relief to the violence of
these transports, by leading her thoughts to the obligations which Mr.
Gardiner's behaviour laid them all under.
“Well,” cried her mother, “it is all very right; who should do it but
must have had all his money, you know; and it is the first time we have
you write for me. We will settle with your father about the money
afterwards; but the things should be ordered immediately.”
She was then proceeding to all the particulars of calico, muslin, and
father was at leisure to be consulted. One day's delay, she observed,
would be of small importance; and her mother was too happy to be quite
so obstinate as usual. Other schemes, too, came into her head.
“I will go to Meryton,” said she, “as soon as I am dressed, and tell the
on Lady Lucas and Mrs. Long. Kitty, run down and order the carriage.
heard the good news? Miss Lydia is going to be married; and you shall
congratulations amongst the rest, and then, sick of this folly, took
looking forward, neither rational happiness nor worldly prosperity could
be justly expected for her sister, in looking back to what they had
feared, only two hours ago, she felt all the advantages of what they had
the better provision of his children, and of his wife, if she survived
prevailing on one of the most worthless young men in Great Britain to be
her husband might then have rested in its proper place.
should be forwarded at the sole expense of his brother-in-law, and he
was determined, if possible, to find out the extent of his assistance,
and to discharge the obligation as soon as he could.
useless, for, of course, they were to have a son. The son was to join
in cutting off the entail, as soon as he should be of age, and the widow
successively entered the world, but yet the son was to come; and Mrs.
would. This event had at last been despaired of, but it was then
husband's love of independence had alone prevented their exceeding their
the children. But in what proportions it should be divided amongst the
latter depended on the will of the parents. This was one point, with
could have no hesitation in acceding to the proposal before him. In
terms of grateful acknowledgment for the kindness of his brother,
though expressed most concisely, he then delivered on paper his perfect
approbation of all that was done, and his willingness to fulfil the
be done with so little inconvenience to himself as by the present
arrangement. He would scarcely be ten pounds a year the loser by the
hundred that was to be paid them; for, what with her board and pocket
allowance, and the continual presents in money which passed to her
through her mother's hands, Lydia's expenses had been very little within
another very welcome surprise; for his wish at present was to have as
little trouble in the business as possible. When the first transports
in its execution. He begged to know further particulars of what he
was indebted to his brother, but was too angry with Lydia to send any
The good news spread quickly through the house, and with proportionate
speed through the neighbourhood. It was borne in the latter with decent
philosophy. To be sure, it would have been more for the advantage
of conversation had Miss Lydia Bennet come upon the town; or, as the
happiest alternative, been secluded from the world, in some distant
farmhouse. But there was much to be talked of in marrying her; and the
all the spiteful old ladies in Meryton lost but a little of their spirit
happy day she again took her seat at the head of her table, and in
triumph. The marriage of a daughter, which had been the first object
of her wishes since Jane was sixteen, was now on the point of
servants. She was busily searching through the neighbourhood for a
what their income might be, rejected many as deficient in size and
“Haye Park might do,” said she, “if the Gouldings could quit it--or the
great house at Stoke, if the drawing-room were larger; but Ashworth is
Pulvis Lodge, the attics are dreadful.”
Her husband allowed her to talk on without interruption while the
servants remained. But when they had withdrawn, he said to her: “Mrs.
Bennet, before you take any or all of these houses for your son and
neighbourhood they shall never have admittance. I will not encourage the
impudence of either, by receiving them at Longbourn.”
soon led to another; and Mrs. Bennet found, with amazement and horror,
that her husband would not advance a guinea to buy clothes for his
affection whatever on the occasion. Mrs. Bennet could hardly comprehend
possible. She was more alive to the disgrace which her want of new
clothes must reflect on her daughter's nuptials, than to any sense of
shame at her eloping and living with Wickham a fortnight before they
Elizabeth was now most heartily sorry that she had, from the distress of
the moment, been led to make Mr. Darcy acquainted with their fears for
her sister; for since her marriage would so shortly give the
proper termination to the elopement, they might hope to conceal its
unfavourable beginning from all those who were not immediately on the
She had no fear of its spreading farther through his means. There were
but, at the same time, there was no one whose knowledge of a sister's
there seemed a gulf impassable between them. Had Lydia's marriage been
concluded on the most honourable terms, it was not to be supposed that
Mr. Darcy would connect himself with a family where, to every other
objection, would now be added an alliance and relationship of the
longer hope to be benefited by it. She wanted to hear of him, when there
seemed the least chance of gaining intelligence. She was convinced that
she could have been happy with him, when it was no longer likely they
What a triumph for him, as she often thought, could he know that the
doubted not, as the most generous of his sex; but while he was mortal,
there must be a triumph.
She began now to comprehend that he was exactly the man who, in
was an union that must have been to the advantage of both; by her ease
and from his judgement, information, and knowledge of the world, she
But no such happy marriage could now teach the admiring multitude what
precluding the possibility of the other, was soon to be formed in their
belong to a couple who were only brought together because their passions
were stronger than their virtue, she could easily conjecture.
Mr. Gardiner soon wrote again to his brother. To Mr. Bennet's
promote the welfare of any of his family; and concluded with entreaties
that the subject might never be mentioned to him again. The principal
purport of his letter was to inform them that Mr. Wickham had resolved
on quitting the militia.
considering the removal from that corps as highly advisable, both on
the regulars; and among his former friends, there are still some who
are able and willing to assist him in the army. He has the promise of an
ensigncy in General ----'s regiment, now quartered in the North. It
is an advantage to have it so far from this part of the kingdom. He
promises fairly; and I hope among different people, where they may each
have a character to preserve, they will both be more prudent. I have
and to request that he will satisfy the various creditors of Mr. Wickham
have pledged myself. And will you give yourself the trouble of carrying
and all will be completed in a week. They will then join his regiment,
unless they are first invited to Longbourn; and I understand from Mrs.
leaves the South. She is well, and begs to be dutifully remembered to
you and her mother.--Yours, etc.,
Mr. Bennet and his daughters saw all the advantages of Wickham's removal
from the ----shire as clearly as Mr. Gardiner could do. But Mrs. Bennet
was not so well pleased with it. Lydia's being settled in the North,
for she had by no means given up her plan of their residing in
to send her away! And there are several of the young men, too, that she
admitted into her family again before she set off for the North,
who agreed in wishing, for the sake of their sister's feelings and
and her husband at Longbourn, as soon as they were married, that he was
prevailed on to think as they thought, and act as they wished. And their
mother had the satisfaction of knowing that she would be able to show
her married daughter in the neighbourhood before she was banished to the
North. When Mr. Bennet wrote again to his brother, therefore, he sent
his permission for them to come; and it was settled, that as soon as
the ceremony was over, they should proceed to Longbourn. Elizabeth was
have been the last object of her wishes.
meet them at ----, and they were to return in it by dinner-time. Their
arrival was dreaded by the elder Miss Bennets, and Jane more especially,
who gave Lydia the feelings which would have attended herself, had she
been the culprit, and was wretched in the thought of what her sister
They came. The family were assembled in the breakfast room to receive
them. Smiles decked the face of Mrs. Bennet as the carriage drove up to
the door; her husband looked impenetrably grave; her daughters, alarmed,
Lydia's voice was heard in the vestibule; the door was thrown open, and
she ran into the room. Her mother stepped forwards, embraced her, and
to Wickham, who followed his lady; and wished them both joy with an
alacrity which shewed no doubt of their happiness.
Their reception from Mr. Bennet, to whom they then turned, was not quite
so cordial. His countenance rather gained in austerity; and he scarcely
opened his lips. The easy assurance of the young couple, indeed, was
and fearless. She turned from sister to sister, demanding their
congratulations; and when at length they all sat down, looked eagerly
round the room, took notice of some little alteration in it, and
there.
exactly what they ought, his smiles and his easy address, while he
claimed their relationship, would have delighted them all. Elizabeth had
resolving within herself to draw no limits in future to the impudence
of an impudent man. She blushed, and Jane blushed; but the cheeks of the
two who caused their confusion suffered no variation of colour.
There was no want of discourse. The bride and her mother could neither
of them talk fast enough; and Wickham, who happened to sit near
replies. They seemed each of them to have the happiest memories in the
world. Nothing of the past was recollected with pain; and Lydia led
the world.
it seems but a fortnight I declare; and yet there have been things
enough happened in the time. Good gracious! when I went away, I am sure
Her father lifted up his eyes. Jane was distressed. Elizabeth looked
which she chose to be insensible, gaily continued, “Oh! mamma, do the
people hereabouts know I am married to-day? I was afraid they might not;
should know it, and so I let down the side-glass next to him, and took
off my glove, and let my hand just rest upon the window frame, so that
he might see the ring, and then I bowed and smiled like anything.”
Elizabeth could bear it no longer. She got up, and ran out of the room;
and returned no more, till she heard them passing through the hall to
the dining parlour. She then joined them soon enough to see Lydia, with
anxious parade, walk up to her mother's right hand, and hear her say
spirits increased. She longed to see Mrs. Phillips, the Lucases, and
all their other neighbours, and to hear herself called “Mrs. Wickham”
 by each of them; and in the mean time, she went after dinner to show her
ring, and boast of being married, to Mrs. Hill and the two housemaids.
“Well, mamma,” said she, when they were all returned to the breakfast
am sure my sisters must all envy me. I only hope they may have half
my good luck. They must all go to Brighton. That is the place to get
“Oh, lord! yes;--there is nothing in that. I shall like it of all
shall be at Newcastle all the winter, and I dare say there will be some
balls, and I will take care to get good partners for them all.”
“I should like it beyond anything!” said her mother.
“And then when you go away, you may leave one or two of my sisters
behind you; and I dare say I shall get husbands for them before the
“I thank you for my share of the favour,” said Elizabeth; “but I do not
Their visitors were not to remain above ten days with them. Mr. Wickham
his regiment at the end of a fortnight.
No one but Mrs. Bennet regretted that their stay would be so short; and
she made the most of the time by visiting about with her daughter, and
present observation to be satisfied, from the reason of things, that
their elopement had been brought on by the strength of her love, rather
if that were the case, he was not the young man to resist an opportunity
thing best in the world; and she was sure he would kill more birds on
the first of September, than any body else in the country.
One morning, soon after their arrival, as she was sitting with her two
were not by, when I told mamma and the others all about it. Are not you
“No really,” replied Elizabeth; “I think there cannot be too little said
on the subject.”
that parish. And it was settled that we should all be there by eleven
o'clock. My uncle and aunt and I were to go together; and the others
were to meet us at the church. Well, Monday morning came, and I was in
put it off, and then I should have gone quite distracted. And there was
my aunt, all the time I was dressing, preaching and talking away just as
to know whether he would be married in his blue coat.”
be over; for, by the bye, you are to understand, that my uncle and aunt
were horrid unpleasant all the time I was with them. If you'll believe
me, I did not once put my foot out of doors, though I was there a
rather thin, but, however, the Little Theatre was open. Well, and so
just as the carriage came to the door, my uncle was called away upon
business to that horrid man Mr. Stone. And then, you know, when once
they get together, there is no end of it. Well, I was so frightened I
were beyond the hour, we could not be married all day. But, luckily, he
came back again in ten minutes' time, and then we all set out. However,
I recollected afterwards that if he had been prevented going, the
“Oh, yes!--he was to come there with Wickham, you know. But gracious
them so faithfully! What will Wickham say? It was to be such a secret!”
“If it was to be secret,” said Jane, “say not another word on the
subject. You may depend upon my seeking no further.”
all, and then Wickham would be angry.”
Conjectures as to the meaning of it, rapid and wild, hurried into her
placing his conduct in the noblest light, seemed most improbable. She
Lydia had dropt, if it were compatible with the secrecy which had been
for very cogent reasons, to remain in the secrecy which Lydia seems
to think necessary; and then I must endeavour to be satisfied with
the letter; “and my dear aunt, if you do not tell me in an honourable
of it;--till it appeared whether her inquiries would receive any
satisfaction, she had rather be without a confidante.
Elizabeth had the satisfaction of receiving an answer to her letter as
than, hurrying into the little copse, where she was least likely to
be interrupted, she sat down on one of the benches and prepared to
be happy; for the length of the letter convinced her that it did not
as I am--and nothing but the belief of your being a party concerned
“On the very day of my coming home from Longbourn, your uncle had a most
and that he had seen and talked with them both; Wickham repeatedly,
after ourselves, and came to town with the resolution of hunting for
them. The motive professed was his conviction of its being owing to
in him. He generously imputed the whole to his mistaken pride, and
actions open to the world. His character was to speak for itself. He
called it, therefore, his duty to step forward, and endeavour to remedy
an evil which had been brought on by himself. If he _had another_
in town, before he was able to discover them; but he had something to
direct his search, which was more than _we_ had; and the consciousness
of this was another reason for his resolving to follow us.
of disapprobation, though he did not say what. She then took a large
Wickham indeed had gone to her on their first arrival in London, and had
she been able to receive them into her house, they would have taken up
their abode with her. At length, however, our kind friend procured the
situation, and return to her friends as soon as they could be prevailed
of leaving Wickham. She was sure they should be married some time or
other, and it did not much signify when. Since such were her feelings,
been _his_ design. He confessed himself obliged to leave the regiment,
scrupled not to lay all the ill-consequences of Lydia's flight on her
cherished the hope of more effectually making his fortune by marriage in
some other country. Under such circumstances, however, he was not likely
to be proof against the temptation of immediate relief.
“They met several times, for there was much to be discussed. Wickham of
“Every thing being settled between _them_, Mr. Darcy's next step was to
street the evening before I came home. But Mr. Gardiner could not be
seen, and Mr. Darcy found, on further inquiry, that your father was
still with him, but would quit town the next morning. He did not judge
your father to be a person whom he could so properly consult as your
uncle, and therefore readily postponed seeing him till after the
departure of the former. He did not leave his name, and till the next
“On Saturday he came again. Your father was gone, your uncle at home,
and, as I said before, they had a great deal of talk together.
“They met again on Sunday, and then _I_ saw him too. It was not all
settled before Monday: as soon as it was, the express was sent off to
obstinacy is the real defect of his character, after all. He has been
accused of many faults at different times, but _this_ is the true one.
I do not speak it to be thanked, therefore say nothing about it), your
uncle would most readily have settled the whole.
“They battled it together for a long time, which was more than either
the gentleman or lady concerned in it deserved. But at last your uncle
niece, was forced to put up with only having the probable credit of it,
which went sorely against the grain; and I really believe your letter
that would rob him of his borrowed feathers, and give the praise where
it was due. But, Lizzy, this must go no farther than yourself, or Jane
“You know pretty well, I suppose, what has been done for the young
more than a thousand pounds, another thousand in addition to her own
had been received and noticed as he was. Perhaps there was some truth
in _this_; though I doubt whether _his_ reserve, or _anybody's_ reserve,
can be answerable for the event. But in spite of all this fine talking,
never have yielded, if we had not given him credit for _another
interest_ in the affair.
London once more when the wedding took place, and all money matters were
then to receive the last finish.
admission to the house. _He_ was exactly what he had been, when I
home was exactly of a piece with it, and therefore what I now tell
you can give you no fresh pain. I talked to her repeatedly in the most
serious manner, representing to her all the wickedness of what she had
done, and all the unhappiness she had brought on her family. If she
sometimes quite provoked, but then I recollected my dear Elizabeth and
Jane, and for their sakes had patience with her.
attended the wedding. He dined with us the next day, and was to leave
slyness seems the fashion.
till I have been all round the park. A low phaeton, with a nice little
pair of ponies, would be the very thing.
in which it was difficult to determine whether pleasure or pain bore the
great to be probable, and at the same time dreaded to be just, from the
pain of obligation, were proved beyond their greatest extent to be true!
He had followed them purposely to town, he had taken on himself all
the trouble and mortification attendant on such a research; in which
with, persuade, and finally bribe, the man whom he always most wished to
done all this for a girl whom he could neither regard nor esteem. Her
checked by other considerations, and she soon felt that even her vanity
natural as abhorrence against relationship with Wickham. Brother-in-law
of Wickham! Every kind of pride must revolt from the connection. He had,
wrong; he had liberality, and he had the means of exercising it; and
concerned. It was painful, exceedingly painful, to know that they were
owed the restoration of Lydia, her character, every thing, to him. Oh!
of compassion and honour, he had been able to get the better of himself.
approach; and before she could strike into another path, she was
that the interruption must be unwelcome.”
“True. Are the others coming out?”
“I do not know. Mrs. Bennet and Lydia are going in the carriage to
She replied in the affirmative.
“I almost envy you the pleasure, and yet I believe it would be too much
for me, or else I could take it in my way to Newcastle. And you saw the
“That you were gone into the army, and she was afraid had--not turned
“I was surprised to see Darcy in town last month. We passed each other
several times. I wonder what he can be doing there.”
Elizabeth. “It must be something particular, to take him there at this
understood from the Gardiners that you had.”
“I dare say she will; she has got over the most trying age.”
“Did you go by the village of Kympton?”
“I mention it, because it is the living which I ought to have had. A
and the exertion would soon have been nothing. One ought not to
quiet, the retirement of such a life would have answered all my ideas
of happiness! But it was not to be. Did you ever hear Darcy mention the
left you conditionally only, and at the will of the present patron.”
“You have. Yes, there was something in _that_; I told you so from the
“I _did_ hear, too, that there was a time, when sermon-making was not
declared your resolution of never taking orders, and that the business
They were now almost at the door of the house, for she had walked fast
“Come, Mr. Wickham, we are brother and sister, you know. Do not let
us quarrel about the past. In future, I hope we shall be always of one
he hardly knew how to look, and they entered the house.
by introducing the subject of it; and she was pleased to find that she
entered into her scheme of their all going to Newcastle, was likely to
“Oh, lord! I don't know. Not these two or three years, perhaps.”
“He is as fine a fellow,” said Mr. Bennet, as soon as they were out of
the house, “as ever I saw. He simpers, and smirks, and makes love to
“I often think,” said she, “that there is nothing so bad as parting with
one's friends. One seems so forlorn without them.”
“This is the consequence, you see, Madam, of marrying a daughter,” said
Elizabeth. “It must make you better satisfied that your other four are
But the spiritless condition which this event threw her into was shortly
relieved, and her mind opened again to the agitation of hope, by an
article of news which then began to be in circulation. The housekeeper
at Netherfield had received orders to prepare for the arrival of her
master, who was coming down in a day or two, to shoot there for several
weeks. Mrs. Bennet was quite in the fidgets. She looked at Jane, and
Phillips first brought her the news). “Well, so much the better. Not
to come to Netherfield, if he likes it. And who knows what _may_ happen?
“You may depend on it,” replied the other, “for Mrs. Nicholls was in
to know the truth of it; and she told me that it was certain true. He
comes down on Thursday at the latest, very likely on Wednesday. She was
going to the butcher's, she told me, on purpose to order in some meat on
Elizabeth; but now, as soon as they were alone together, she said:
“I saw you look at me to-day, Lizzy, when my aunt told us of the present
any silly cause. I was only confused for the moment, because I felt that
I _should_ be looked at. I do assure you that the news does not affect
me either with pleasure or pain. I am glad of one thing, that he comes
alone; because we shall see the less of him. Not that I am afraid of
_myself_, but I dread other people's remarks.”
Derbyshire, she might have supposed him capable of coming there with no
other view than what was acknowledged; but she still thought him partial
to Jane, and she wavered as to the greater probability of his coming
there _with_ his friend's permission, or being bold enough to come
feelings in the expectation of his arrival, Elizabeth could easily
more unequal, than she had often seen them.
The subject which had been so warmly canvassed between their parents,
would be from all the neighbouring gentlemen, on his returning to
Netherfield.
in running after my neighbours every time they go away and come back
am determined. We must have Mrs. Long and the Gouldings soon. That will
make thirteen with ourselves, so there will be just room at table for
Consoled by this resolution, she was the better able to bear her
_they_ did. As the day of his arrival drew near,--
hardly bear to hear it thus perpetually talked of. My mother means well;
says. Happy shall I be, when his stay at Netherfield is over!”
is wholly out of my power. You must feel it; and the usual satisfaction
Mr. Bingley arrived. Mrs. Bennet, through the assistance of servants,
contrived to have the earliest tidings of it, that the period of anxiety
the days that must intervene before their invitation could be sent;
hopeless of seeing him before. But on the third morning after his
enter the paddock and ride towards the house.
kept her place at the table; but Elizabeth, to satisfy her mother, went
to the window--she looked,--she saw Mr. Darcy with him, and sat down
“Some acquaintance or other, my dear, I suppose; I am sure I do not
say that I hate the very sight of him.”
of their meeting in Derbyshire, and therefore felt for the awkwardness
which must attend her sister, in seeing him almost for the first time
enough. Each felt for the other, and of course for themselves; and their
mother talked on, of her dislike of Mr. Darcy, and her resolution to be
civil to him only as Mr. Bingley's friend, without being heard by either
of them. But Elizabeth had sources of uneasiness which could not be
information, he was the person to whom the whole family were indebted
for the first of benefits, and whom she regarded herself with an
coming to Netherfield, to Longbourn, and voluntarily seeking her again,
“Let me first see how he behaves,” said she; “it will then be early
lift up her eyes, till anxious curiosity carried them to the face of
her sister as the servant was approaching the door. Jane looked a little
paler than usual, but more sedate than Elizabeth had expected. On the
gentlemen's appearing, her colour increased; yet she received them with
Elizabeth said as little to either as civility would allow, and sat down
she had seen him at Pemberley. But, perhaps he could not in her mother's
especially when contrasted with the cold and ceremonious politeness of
Elizabeth, particularly, who knew that her mother owed to the latter
the preservation of her favourite daughter from irremediable infamy,
was not seated by her; perhaps that was the reason of his silence; but
bringing the sound of his voice; and when occasionally, unable to resist
the impulse of curiosity, she raised her eyes to his face, she as often
the ground. More thoughtfulness and less anxiety to please, than when
they last met, were plainly expressed. She was disappointed, and angry
“Could I expect it to be otherwise!” said she. “Yet why did he come?”
you meant to quit the place entirely at Michaelmas; but, however, I hope
it is not true. A great many changes have happened in the neighbourhood,
seen it in the papers. It was in The Times and The Courier, I know;
George Wickham, Esq. to Miss Lydia Bennet,' without there being a
syllable said of her father, or the place where she lived, or anything.
It was my brother Gardiner's drawing up too, and I wonder how he came to
dared not lift up her eyes. How Mr. Darcy looked, therefore, she could
 continued her mother, “but at the same time, Mr. Bingley, it is very
Newcastle, a place quite northward, it seems, and there they are to stay
I do not know how long. His regiment is there; for I suppose you have
heard of his leaving the ----shire, and of his being gone into the
however, the exertion of speaking, which nothing else had so effectually
done before; and she asked Bingley whether he meant to make any stay in
the country at present. A few weeks, he believed.
“When you have killed all your own birds, Mr. Bingley,” said her mother,
will save all the best of the covies for you.”
attention! Were the same fair prospect to arise at present as had
flattered them a year ago, every thing, she was persuaded, would be
hastening to the same vexatious conclusion. At that instant, she felt
be in company with either of them. Their society can afford no pleasure
that will atone for such wretchedness as this! Let me never see either
one or the other again!”
Yet the misery, for which years of happiness were to offer no
how much the beauty of her sister re-kindled the admiration of her
When the gentlemen rose to go away, Mrs. Bennet was mindful of her
intended civility, and they were invited and engaged to dine at
his concern at having been prevented by business. They then went away.
Mrs. Bennet had been strongly inclined to ask them to stay and dine
there that day; but, though she always kept a very good table, she did
on whom she had such anxious designs, or satisfy the appetite and pride
As soon as they were gone, Elizabeth walked out to recover her spirits;
or in other words, to dwell without interruption on those subjects that
must deaden them more. Mr. Darcy's behaviour astonished and vexed her.
he was in town; and why not to me? If he fears me, why come hither? If
Her resolution was for a short time involuntarily kept by the approach
better satisfied with their visitors, than Elizabeth.
his coming. I am glad he dines here on Tuesday. It will then be publicly
They did not see the gentlemen again till Tuesday; and Mrs. Bennet, in
the meanwhile, was giving way to all the happy schemes, which the good
On Tuesday there was a large party assembled at Longbourn; and the two
who were most anxiously expected, to the credit of their punctuality
as sportsmen, were in very good time. When they repaired to the
dining-room, Elizabeth eagerly watched to see whether Bingley would take
the place, which, in all their former parties, had belonged to him, by
her sister. Her prudent mother, occupied by the same ideas, forbore
to invite him to sit by herself. On entering the room, he seemed to
own, would be speedily secured. Though she dared not depend upon the
gave her all the animation that her spirits could boast; for she was in
no cheerful humour. Mr. Darcy was almost as far from her as the table
could divide them. He was on one side of her mother. She knew how little
such a situation would give pleasure to either, or make either appear to
advantage. She was not near enough to hear any of their discourse, but
she could see how seldom they spoke to each other, and how formal and
cold was their manner whenever they did. Her mother's ungraciousness,
made the sense of what they owed him more painful to Elizabeth's mind;
him that his kindness was neither unknown nor unfelt by the whole of the
She was in hopes that the evening would afford some opportunity of
bringing them together; that the whole of the visit would not pass away
without enabling them to enter into something more of conversation than
the mere ceremonious salutation attending his entrance. Anxious
and uneasy, the period which passed in the drawing-room, before the
uncivil. She looked forward to their entrance as the point on which all
her chance of pleasure for the evening must depend.
“If he does not come to me, _then_,” said she, “I shall give him up for
answered her hopes; but, alas! the ladies had crowded round the table,
where Miss Bennet was making tea, and Elizabeth pouring out the coffee,
in so close a confederacy that there was not a single vacancy near her
which would admit of a chair. And on the gentlemen's approaching, one of
the girls moved closer to her than ever, and said, in a whisper:
“The men shan't come and part us, I am determined. We want none of them;
Darcy had walked away to another part of the room. She followed him with
to help anybody to coffee; and then was enraged against herself for
expect a renewal of his love? Is there one among the sex, who would not
protest against such a weakness as a second proposal to the same woman?
There is no indignity so abhorrent to their feelings!”
himself; and she seized the opportunity of saying:
“Yes, she will remain there till Christmas.”
“Mrs. Annesley is with her. The others have been gone on to Scarborough,
these three weeks.”
some minutes, in silence; and, at last, on the young lady's whispering
When the tea-things were removed, and the card-tables placed, the ladies
all rose, and Elizabeth was then hoping to be soon joined by him,
mother's rapacity for whist players, and in a few moments after seated
with the rest of the party. She now lost every expectation of pleasure.
They were confined for the evening at different tables, and she had
of the room, as to make him play as unsuccessfully as herself.
Mrs. Bennet had designed to keep the two Netherfield gentlemen to
supper; but their carriage was unluckily ordered before any of the
others, and she had no opportunity of detaining them.
“Well girls,” said she, as soon as they were left to themselves, “What
say you to the day? I think every thing has passed off uncommonly well,
venison was roasted to a turn--and everybody said they never saw so
fat a haunch. The soup was fifty times better than what we had at the
Lucases' last week; and even Mr. Darcy acknowledged, that the partridges
beauty. Mrs. Long said so too, for I asked her whether you did not. And
at Netherfield at last.' She did indeed. I do think Mrs. Long is as good
and not at all handsome: I like them prodigiously.”
not seeing him there again the next day, to make his proposals.
party seemed so well selected, so suitable one with the other. I hope we
pleasing, than any other man.”
“And how impossible in others!”
ten days time. He sat with them above an hour, and was in remarkably
good spirits. Mrs. Bennet invited him to dine with them; but, with many
give him leave, would take an early opportunity of waiting on them.
He came, and in such very good time that the ladies were none of them
forwarder than either of us, for she went up stairs half an hour ago.”
But when her mother was gone, Jane would not be prevailed on to go down
The same anxiety to get them by themselves was visible again in the
evening. After tea, Mr. Bennet retired to the library, as was his
the five being thus removed, Mrs. Bennet sat looking and winking at
Elizabeth and Catherine for a considerable time, without making any
impression on them. Elizabeth would not observe her; and when at last
Kitty did, she very innocently said, “What is the matter mamma? What do
“Nothing child, nothing. I did not wink at you.” She then sat still
speak to you,” took her out of the room. Jane instantly gave a look
Bennet half-opened the door and called out:
“We may as well leave them by themselves you know;” said her mother, as
soon as she was in the hall. “Kitty and I are going up stairs to sit in
Elizabeth made no attempt to reason with her mother, but remained
quietly in the hall, till she and Kitty were out of sight, then returned
into the drawing-room.
thing that was charming, except the professed lover of her daughter. His
ease and cheerfulness rendered him a most agreeable addition to their
evening party; and he bore with the ill-judged officiousness of the
mother, and heard all her silly remarks with a forbearance and command
of countenance particularly grateful to the daughter.
between the sisters concerning Bingley; but Elizabeth went to bed in
the happy belief that all must speedily be concluded, unless Mr. Darcy
returned within the stated time. Seriously, however, she felt tolerably
the morning together, as had been agreed on. The latter was much more
silence; and he was more communicative, and less eccentric, than the
other had ever seen him. Bingley of course returned with him to dinner;
and in the evening Mrs. Bennet's invention was again at work to get
to write, went into the breakfast room for that purpose soon after tea;
for as the others were all going to sit down to cards, she could not be
wanted to counteract her mother's schemes.
But on returning to the drawing-room, when her letter was finished, she
saw, to her infinite surprise, there was reason to fear that her mother
had been too ingenious for her. On opening the door, she perceived her
sister and Bingley standing together over the hearth, as if engaged in
earnest conversation; and had this led to no suspicion, the faces of
both, as they hastily turned round and moved away from each other, would
thought was still worse. Not a syllable was uttered by either; and
Elizabeth was on the point of going away again, when Bingley, who as
well as the other had sat down, suddenly rose, and whispering a few
words to her sister, ran out of the room.
pleasure; and instantly embracing her, acknowledged, with the liveliest
emotion, that she was the happiest creature in the world.
said for the present.
“I must go instantly to my mother;” she cried. “I would not on any
from anyone but myself. He is gone to my father already. Oh! Lizzy, to
She then hastened away to her mother, who had purposely broken up the
Elizabeth, who was left by herself, now smiled at the rapidity and ease
with which an affair was finally settled, that had given them so many
“And this,” said she, “is the end of all his friend's anxious
circumspection! of all his sister's falsehood and contrivance! the
father had been short and to the purpose.
“Where is your sister?” said he hastily, as he opened the door.
“With my mother up stairs. She will be down in a moment, I dare say.”
He then shut the door, and, coming up to her, claimed the good wishes
her delight in the prospect of their relationship. They shook hands with
great cordiality; and then, till her sister came down, she had to listen
expectations of felicity to be rationally founded, because they had for
basis the excellent understanding, and super-excellent disposition of
It was an evening of no common delight to them all; the satisfaction of
Mr. Bennet joined them at supper, his voice and manner plainly showed
Not a word, however, passed his lips in allusion to it, till their
visitor took his leave for the night; but as soon as he was gone, he
doing very well together. Your tempers are by no means unlike. You are
“Exceed their income! My dear Mr. Bennet,” cried his wife, “what are you
that you should come together. Oh! he is the handsomest young man that
favourite child. At that moment, she cared for no other. Her younger
Mary petitioned for the use of the library at Netherfield; and Kitty
begged very hard for a few balls there every winter.
but she found herself considerably useful to both of them in those hours
of separation that must sometimes occur. In the absence of Jane, he
always attached himself to Elizabeth, for the pleasure of talking of
her; and when Bingley was gone, Jane constantly sought the same means of
chosen so much more advantageously in many respects. But when they see,
as I trust they will, that their brother is happy with me, they will
can never be what we once were to each other.”
“That is the most unforgiving speech,” said Elizabeth, “that I ever
the dupe of Miss Bingley's pretended regard.”
“He made a little mistake to be sure; but it is to the credit of his
the little value he put on his own good qualities. Elizabeth was pleased
to find that he had not betrayed the interference of his friend; for,
though Jane had the most generous and forgiving heart in the world, she
“I am certainly the most fortunate creature that ever existed!” cried
above them all! If I could but see _you_ as happy! If there _were_ but
such another man for you!”
good luck, I may meet with another Mr. Collins in time.”
The situation of affairs in the Longbourn family could not be long a
and she ventured, without any permission, to do the same by all her
The Bennets were speedily pronounced to be the luckiest family in the
they had been generally proved to be marked out for misfortune.
formed, as he and the females of the family were sitting together in the
dining-room, their attention was suddenly drawn to the window, by the
sound of a carriage; and they perceived a chaise and four driving up
the lawn. It was too early in the morning for visitors, and besides, the
equipage did not answer to that of any of their neighbours. The horses
were post; and neither the carriage, nor the livery of the servant who
preceded it, were familiar to them. As it was certain, however, that
the confinement of such an intrusion, and walk away with him into the
shrubbery. They both set off, and the conjectures of the remaining three
continued, though with little satisfaction, till the door was thrown
open and their visitor entered. It was Lady Catherine de Bourgh.
They were of course all intending to be surprised; but their
astonishment was beyond their expectation; and on the part of Mrs.
Bennet and Kitty, though she was perfectly unknown to them, even
She entered the room with an air more than usually ungracious, made no
other reply to Elizabeth's salutation than a slight inclination of the
name to her mother on her ladyship's entrance, though no request of
high importance, received her with the utmost politeness. After sitting
mother.”
“Yes, madam,” said Mrs. Bennet, delighted to speak to Lady Catherine.
and my eldest is somewhere about the grounds, walking with a young man
who, I believe, will soon become a part of the family.”
“You have a very small park here,” returned Lady Catherine after a short
“This must be a most inconvenient sitting room for the evening, in
summer; the windows are full west.”
Mrs. Bennet assured her that they never sat there after dinner, and then
“May I take the liberty of asking your ladyship whether you left Mr. and
“Yes, very well. I saw them the night before last.”
Charlotte, as it seemed the only probable motive for her calling. But no
refreshment; but Lady Catherine very resolutely, and not very politely,
declined eating anything; and then, rising up, said to Elizabeth,
“Miss Bennet, there seemed to be a prettyish kind of a little wilderness
“Go, my dear,” cried her mother, “and show her ladyship about the
different walks. I think she will be pleased with the hermitage.”
attended her noble guest downstairs. As they passed through the
hall, Lady Catherine opened the doors into the dining-parlour and
drawing-room, and pronouncing them, after a short survey, to be decent
Her carriage remained at the door, and Elizabeth saw that her
waiting-woman was in it. They proceeded in silence along the gravel walk
that led to the copse; Elizabeth was determined to make no effort for
As soon as they entered the copse, Lady Catherine began in the following
“You can be at no loss, Miss Bennet, to understand the reason of my
journey hither. Your own heart, your own conscience, must tell you why I
for the honour of seeing you here.”
sister was on the point of being most advantageously married, but that
so much as to suppose the truth of it possible, I instantly resolved
with astonishment and disdain, “I wonder you took the trouble of coming
coolly, “will be rather a confirmation of it; if, indeed, such a report
“If! Do you then pretend to be ignorant of it? Has it not been
“And can you likewise declare, that there is no foundation for it?”
“It ought to be so; it must be so, while he retains the use of his
“If I have, I shall be the last person to confess it.”
language as this. I am almost the nearest relation he has in the world,
“Let me be rightly understood. This match, to which you have the
Lady Catherine hesitated for a moment, and then replied:
“The engagement between them is of a peculiar kind. From their infancy,
they have been intended for each other. It was the favourite wish of
_his_ mother, as well as of hers. While in their cradles, we planned
the union: and now, at the moment when the wishes of both sisters would
be accomplished in their marriage, to be prevented by a young woman of
inferior birth, of no importance in the world, and wholly unallied to
the family! Do you pay no regard to the wishes of his friends? To his
“Yes, and I had heard it before. But what is that to me? If there is
no other objection to my marrying your nephew, I shall certainly not
be kept from it by knowing that his mother and aunt wished him to
marry Miss de Bourgh. You both did as much as you could in planning the
marriage. Its completion depended on others. If Mr. Darcy is neither
another choice? And if I am that choice, why may not I accept him?”
friends, if you wilfully act against the inclinations of all. You will
“These are heavy misfortunes,” replied Elizabeth. “But the wife of Mr.
attached to her situation, that she could, upon the whole, have no cause
here with the determined resolution of carrying my purpose; nor will
whims. I have not been in the habit of brooking disappointment.”
nephew are formed for each other. They are descended, on the maternal
side, from the same noble line; and, on the father's, from respectable,
both sides is splendid. They are destined for each other by the voice of
every member of their respective houses; and what is to divide them?
were sensible of your own good, you would not wish to quit the sphere in
“True. You _are_ a gentleman's daughter. But who was your mother?
Who are your uncles and aunts? Do not imagine me ignorant of their
not object to them, they can be nothing to _you_.”
Though Elizabeth would not, for the mere purpose of obliging Lady
Catherine, have answered this question, she could not but say, after a
Lady Catherine seemed pleased.
“I will make no promise of the kind.”
I will ever recede. I shall not go away till you have given me the
your daughter; but would my giving you the wished-for promise make their
Allow me to say, Lady Catherine, that the arguments with which you have
supported this extraordinary application have been as frivolous as the
you think I can be worked on by such persuasions as these. How far your
therefore, to be importuned no farther on the subject.”
“Not so hasty, if you please. I have by no means done. To all the
objections I have already urged, I have still another to add. I am
no stranger to the particulars of your youngest sister's infamous
elopement. I know it all; that the young man's marrying her was a
patched-up business, at the expence of your father and uncles. And is
such a girl to be my nephew's sister? Is her husband, is the son of his
late father's steward, to be his brother? Heaven and earth!--of what are
you thinking? Are the shades of Pemberley to be thus polluted?”
“You can now have nothing further to say,” she resentfully answered.
the house.”
And she rose as she spoke. Lady Catherine rose also, and they turned
“You have no regard, then, for the honour and credit of my nephew!
must disgrace him in the eyes of everybody?”
“Lady Catherine, I have nothing further to say. You know my sentiments.”
“You are then resolved to have him?”
“It is well. You refuse, then, to oblige me. You refuse to obey the
the opinion of all his friends, and make him the contempt of the world.”
“Neither duty, nor honour, nor gratitude,” replied Elizabeth, “have any
possible claim on me, in the present instance. No principle of either
would be violated by my marriage with Mr. Darcy. And with regard to the
resentment of his family, or the indignation of the world, if the former
concern--and the world in general would have too much sense to join in
the scorn.”
In this manner Lady Catherine talked on, till they were at the door of
the carriage, when, turning hastily round, she added, “I take no leave
of you, Miss Bennet. I send no compliments to your mother. You deserve
ladyship to return into the house, walked quietly into it herself. She
heard the carriage drive away as she proceeded up stairs. Her mother
impatiently met her at the door of the dressing-room, to ask why Lady
Catherine would not come in again and rest herself.
civil! for she only came, I suppose, to tell us the Collinses were
acknowledge the substance of their conversation was impossible.
hours, learn to think of it less than incessantly. Lady Catherine, it
appeared, had actually taken the trouble of this journey from Rosings,
for the sole purpose of breaking off her supposed engagement with Mr.
Darcy. It was a rational scheme, to be sure! but from what the report
of their engagement could originate, Elizabeth was at a loss to imagine;
till she recollected that _his_ being the intimate friend of Bingley,
and _her_ being the sister of Jane, was enough, at a time when the
expectation of one wedding made everybody eager for another, to supply
the idea. She had not herself forgotten to feel that the marriage of her
sister must bring them more frequently together. And her neighbours
at Lucas Lodge, therefore (for through their communication with the
Collinses, the report, she concluded, had reached Lady Catherine), had
In revolving Lady Catherine's expressions, however, she could not help
feeling some uneasiness as to the possible consequence of her persisting
prevent their marriage, it occurred to Elizabeth that she must meditate
representation of the evils attached to a connection with her, she dared
not pronounce. She knew not the exact degree of his affection for his
was certain that, in enumerating the miseries of a marriage with _one_,
probably feel that the arguments, which to Elizabeth had appeared weak
seemed likely, the advice and entreaty of so near a relation might
Catherine might see him in her way through town; and his engagement to
Bingley of coming again to Netherfield must give way.
“If, therefore, an excuse for not keeping his promise should come to his
it. I shall then give over every expectation, every wish of his
The surprise of the rest of the family, on hearing who their visitor had
been, was very great; but they obligingly satisfied it, with the same
Elizabeth was spared from much teasing on the subject.
father, who came out of his library with a letter in his hand.
She followed him thither; and her curiosity to know what he had to
tell her was heightened by the supposition of its being in some manner
connected with the letter he held. It suddenly struck her that it
might be from Lady Catherine; and she anticipated with dismay all the
She followed her father to the fire place, and they both sat down. He
then said,
contents. I did not know before, that I had two daughters on the brink
The colour now rushed into Elizabeth's cheeks in the instantaneous
conviction of its being a letter from the nephew, instead of the aunt;
and she was undetermined whether most to be pleased that he explained
himself at all, or offended that his letter was not rather addressed to
herself; when her father continued:
as these; but I think I may defy even _your_ sagacity, to discover the
“Something very much to the purpose of course. He begins with
congratulations on the approaching nuptials of my eldest daughter, of
which, it seems, he has been told by some of the good-natured, gossiping
offered you the sincere congratulations of Mrs. Collins and myself on
this happy event, let me now add a short hint on the subject of another;
of which we have been advertised by the same authority. Your daughter
Elizabeth, it is presumed, will not long bear the name of Bennet, after
her elder sister has resigned it, and the chosen partner of her fate may
be reasonably looked up to as one of the most illustrious personages in
gentleman is blessed, in a peculiar way, with every thing the heart of
patronage. Yet in spite of all these temptations, let me warn my cousin
that his aunt, Lady Catherine de Bourgh, does not look on the match with
“_Mr. Darcy_, you see, is the man! Now, Lizzy, I think I _have_
surprised you. Could he, or the Lucases, have pitched on any man within
the circle of our acquaintance, whose name would have given the lie
more effectually to what they related? Mr. Darcy, who never looks at any
Elizabeth tried to join in her father's pleasantry, but could only force
“'After mentioning the likelihood of this marriage to her ladyship last
felt on the occasion; when it became apparent, that on the score of some
family objections on the part of my cousin, she would never give her
to give the speediest intelligence of this to my cousin, that she and
her noble admirer may be aware of what they are about, and not run
business has been so well hushed up, and am only concerned that their
living together before the marriage took place should be so generally
known. I must not, however, neglect the duties of my station, or refrain
from declaring my amazement at hearing that you received the young
couple into your house as soon as they were married. It was an
encouragement of vice; and had I been the rector of Longbourn, I should
very strenuously have opposed it. You ought certainly to forgive them,
as a Christian, but never to admit them in your sight, or allow their
live, but to make sport for our neighbours, and laugh at them in our
“Yes--_that_ is what makes it amusing. Had they fixed on any other man
him the preference even over Wickham, much as I value the impudence and
hypocrisy of my son-in-law. And pray, Lizzy, what said Lady Catherine
been asked without the least suspicion, she was not distressed by
feelings appear what they were not. It was necessary to laugh, when she
would rather have cried. Her father had most cruelly mortified her, by
with him to Longbourn before many days had passed after Lady Catherine's
to tell him of their having seen his aunt, of which her daughter sat
their all walking out. It was agreed to. Mrs. Bennet was not in the
habit of walking; Mary could never spare time; but the remaining five
set off together. Bingley and Jane, however, soon allowed the others
to outstrip them. They lagged behind, while Elizabeth, Kitty, and Darcy
were to entertain each other. Very little was said by either; Kitty
desperate resolution; and perhaps he might be doing the same.
They walked towards the Lucases, because Kitty wished to call upon
when Kitty left them she went boldly on with him alone. Now was the
“Mr. Darcy, I am a very selfish creature; and, for the sake of giving
acknowledge to you how gratefully I feel it. Were it known to the rest
me that you had been concerned in the matter; and, of course, I could
not rest till I knew the particulars. Let me thank you again and again,
in the name of all my family, for that generous compassion which induced
you to take so much trouble, and bear so many mortifications, for the
sake of discovering them.”
That the wish of giving happiness to you might add force to the other
_family_ owe me nothing. Much as I respect them, I believe I thought
feelings are still what they were last April, tell me so at once. _My_
Elizabeth, feeling all the more than common awkwardness and anxiety of
so material a change, since the period to which he alluded, as to make
felt before; and he expressed himself on the occasion as sensibly and as
been able to encounter his eye, she might have seen how well the
be thought, and felt, and said, for attention to any other objects. She
soon learnt that they were indebted for their present good understanding
to the efforts of his aunt, who did call on him in her return through
London, and there relate her journey to Longbourn, its motive, and the
every expression of the latter which, in her ladyship's apprehension,
peculiarly denoted her perverseness and assurance; in the belief that
acknowledged it to Lady Catherine, frankly and openly.”
behaviour to you at the time had merited the severest reproof. It was
“We will not quarrel for the greater share of blame annexed to that
evening,” said Elizabeth. “The conduct of neither, if strictly examined,
will be irreproachable; but since then, we have both, I hope, improved
then said, of my conduct, my manners, my expressions during the whole of
scarcely conceive, how they have tortured me;--though it was some time,
I confess, before I was reasonable enough to allow their justice.”
“I was certainly very far from expecting them to make so strong an
impression. I had not the smallest idea of their being ever felt in such
“I can easily believe it. You thought me then devoid of every proper
“Oh! do not repeat what I then said. These recollections will not do at
necessary. I hope you have destroyed the letter. There was one part
especially, the opening of it, which I should dread your having the
“The letter shall certainly be burnt, if you believe it essential to the
opinions not entirely unalterable, they are not, I hope, quite so easily
adieu is charity itself. But think no more of the letter. The feelings
of the person who wrote, and the person who received it, are now
so widely different from what they were then, that every unpleasant
of my philosophy. Think only of the past as its remembrance gives you
“I cannot give you credit for any philosophy of the kind. Your
retrospections must be so totally void of reproach, that the contentment
arising from them is not of philosophy, but, what is much better, of
was given good principles, but left to follow them in pride and conceit.
by my parents, who, though good themselves (my father, particularly, all
circle; to think meanly of all the rest of the world; to wish at least
to think meanly of their sense and worth compared with my own. Such I
“Had you then persuaded yourself that I should?”
“My object then,” replied Darcy, “was to show you, by every civility in
my power, that I was not so mean as to resent the past; and I hoped to
see that your reproofs had been attended to. How soon any other wishes
introduced themselves I can hardly tell, but I believe in about half an
He then told her of Georgiana's delight in her acquaintance, and of her
the cause of that interruption, she soon learnt that his resolution of
before he quitted the inn, and that his gravity and thoughtfulness
there had arisen from no other struggles than what such a purpose must
each, to be dwelt on farther.
anything about it, they found at last, on examining their watches, that
introduced the discussion of their affairs. Darcy was delighted with
their engagement; his friend had given him the earliest information of
“I must ask whether you were surprised?” said Elizabeth.
though he exclaimed at the term, she found that it had been pretty much
the case.
“On the evening before my going to London,” said he, “I made a
the slightest suspicion. I told him, moreover, that I believed myself
unabated, I felt no doubt of their happiness together.”
“From the former. I had narrowly observed her during the two visits
and it was rather too early to begin. In anticipating the happiness
continued the conversation till they reached the house. In the hall they
which Elizabeth received from Jane as soon as she entered their room,
and from all the others when they sat down to table. She had only to
say in reply, that they had wandered about, till she was beyond her own
knowledge. She coloured as she spoke; but neither that, nor anything
else, awakened a suspicion of the truth.
acknowledged lovers talked and laughed, the unacknowledged were silent.
and Elizabeth, agitated and confused, rather _knew_ that she was happy
than _felt_ herself to be so; for, besides the immediate embarrassment,
there were other evils before her. She anticipated what would be felt
in the family when her situation became known; she was aware that no
one liked him but Jane; and even feared that with the others it was a
in earnest. I speak nothing but the truth. He still loves me, and we are
“You know nothing of the matter. _That_ is all to be forgot. Perhaps I
these, a good memory is unpardonable. This is the last time I shall ever
certain? forgive the question--are you quite certain that you can be
we are to be the happiest couple in the world. But are you pleased,
Jane? Shall you like to have such a brother?”
“Very, very much. Nothing could give either Bingley or myself more
really love him quite well enough? Oh, Lizzy! do anything rather than
Another entreaty that she would be serious, however, produced the
further to wish.
husband, there can be only Bingley and yourself more dear to me. But
of it to another, not to you.”
Elizabeth told her the motives of her secrecy. She had been unwilling
to mention Bingley; and the unsettled state of her own feelings had made
her equally avoid the name of his friend. But now she would no longer
and half the night spent in conversation.
“Good gracious!” cried Mrs. Bennet, as she stood at a window the next
other, and not disturb us with his company. What shall we do with him?
was really vexed that her mother should be always giving him such an
epithet.
As soon as they entered, Bingley looked at her so expressively, and
never seen the view.”
“It may do very well for the others,” replied Mr. Bingley; “but I am
she had rather stay at home. Darcy professed a great curiosity to see
the view from the Mount, and Elizabeth silently consented. As she went
all for Jane's sake, you know; and there is no occasion for talking
to him, except just now and then. So, do not put yourself to
During their walk, it was resolved that Mr. Bennet's consent should be
asked in the course of the evening. Elizabeth reserved to herself the
application for her mother's. She could not determine how her mother
would take it; sometimes doubting whether all his wealth and grandeur
would be enough to overcome her abhorrence of the man. But whether she
were violently set against the match, or violently delighted with it, it
the first raptures of her joy, than the first vehemence of her
In the evening, soon after Mr. Bennet withdrew to the library, she saw
extreme. She did not fear her father's opposition, but he was going to
he approached the table where she was sitting with Kitty; and, while
pretending to admire her work said in a whisper, “Go to your father, he
wants you in the library.” She was gone directly.
Her father was walking about the room, looking grave and anxious.
How earnestly did she then wish that her former opinions had been more
but they were now necessary, and she assured him, with some confusion,
“Or, in other words, you are determined to have him. He is rich, to be
sure, and you may have more fine clothes and fine carriages than Jane.
But will they make you happy?”
“Have you any other objection,” said Elizabeth, “than your belief of my
know what he really is; then pray do not pain me by speaking of him in
“Lizzy,” said her father, “I have given him my consent. He is the kind
your disposition, Lizzy. I know that you could be neither happy nor
up to him as a superior. Your lively talents would place you in the
discredit and misery. My child, let me not have the grief of seeing
at length, by repeated assurances that Mr. Darcy was really the object
of her choice, by explaining the gradual change which her estimation of
was not the work of a day, but had stood the test of many months'
conquer her father's incredulity, and reconcile him to the match.
say. If this be the case, he deserves you. I could not have parted with
To complete the favourable impression, she then told him what Mr. Darcy
made up the match, gave the money, paid the fellow's debts, and got him
his commission! So much the better. It will save me a world of trouble
paid him; but these violent young lovers carry every thing their own
his love for you, and there will be an end of the matter.”
He then recollected her embarrassment a few days before, on his reading
at last to go--saying, as she quitted the room, “If any young men come
for Mary or Kitty, send them in, for I am quite at leisure.”
the others with tolerable composure. Every thing was too recent for
gaiety, but the evening passed tranquilly away; there was no longer
anything material to be dreaded, and the comfort of ease and familiarity
When her mother went up to her dressing-room at night, she followed her,
and made the important communication. Its effect was most extraordinary;
what was for the advantage of her family, or that came in the shape of a
lover to any of them. She began at length to recover, to fidget about in
her mother followed her.
This was a sad omen of what her mother's behaviour to the gentleman
himself might be; and Elizabeth found that, though in the certain
consent, there was still something to be wished for. But the morrow
Elizabeth had the satisfaction of seeing her father taking pains to get
you had once made a beginning; but what could set you off in the first
“I cannot fix on the hour, or the spot, or the look, or the words, which
laid the foundation. It is too long ago. I was in the middle before I
to _you_ was at least always bordering on the uncivil, and I never spoke
to you without rather wishing to give you pain than not. Now be sincere;
“For the liveliness of your mind, I did.”
attention. You were disgusted with the women who were always speaking,
interested you, because I was so unlike _them_. Had you not been really
amiable, you would have hated me for it; but in spite of the pains you
in your heart, you thoroughly despised the persons who so assiduously
courted you. There--I have saved you the trouble of accounting for
of _that_ when they fall in love.”
“Was there no good in your affectionate behaviour to Jane while she was
ill at Netherfield?”
to exaggerate them as much as possible; and, in return, it belongs to me
to come to the point at last. What made you so shy of me, when you first
_Too much_, I am afraid; for what becomes of the moral, if our comfort
springs from a breach of promise? for I ought not to have mentioned the
Catherine's unjustifiable endeavours to separate us were the means of
“Lady Catherine has been of infinite use, which ought to make her happy,
Netherfield for? Was it merely to ride to Longbourn and be embarrassed?
“My real purpose was to see _you_, and to judge, if I could, whether I
myself, was to see whether your sister were still partial to Bingley,
and if she were, to make the confession to him which I have since made.”
“Shall you ever have courage to announce to Lady Catherine what is to
admire the evenness of your writing, as another young lady once did. But
for your long, kind, satisfactory, detail of particulars; but to say the
fancy, indulge your imagination in every possible flight which the
for not going to the Lakes. How could I be so silly as to wish it! Your
idea of the ponies is delightful. We will go round the Park every day. I
am the happiest creature in the world. Perhaps other people have said so
only smiles, I laugh. Mr. Darcy sends you all the love in the world that
Mr. Darcy's letter to Lady Catherine was in a different style; and still
different from either was what Mr. Bennet sent to Mr. Collins, in reply
be the wife of Mr. Darcy. Console Lady Catherine as well as you can.
But, if I were you, I would stand by the nephew. He has more to give.
Miss Bingley's congratulations to her brother, on his approaching
to Jane on the occasion, to express her delight, and repeat all her
was as sincere as her brother's in sending it. Four sides of paper were
to Elizabeth from his wife, the Longbourn family heard that the
Collinses were come themselves to Lucas Lodge. The reason of this
sudden removal was soon evident. Lady Catherine had been rendered
so exceedingly angry by the contents of her nephew's letter, that
Charlotte, really rejoicing in the match, was anxious to get away till
the storm was blown over. At such a moment, the arrival of her friend
was a sincere pleasure to Elizabeth, though in the course of their
meetings she must sometimes think the pleasure dearly bought, when she
saw Mr. Darcy exposed to all the parading and obsequious civility of
the brightest jewel of the country, and expressed his hopes of their all
Mrs. Phillips's vulgarity was another, and perhaps a greater, tax on his
too much awe of him to speak with the familiarity which Bingley's good
him from the frequent notice of either, and was ever anxious to keep
without mortification; and though the uncomfortable feelings arising
from all this took from the season of courtship much of its pleasure, it
added to the hope of the future; and she looked forward with delight to
the time when they should be removed from society so little pleasing
to either, to all the comfort and elegance of their family party at
Happy for all her maternal feelings was the day on which Mrs. Bennet got
be guessed. I wish I could say, for the sake of her family, that the
accomplishment of her earnest desire in the establishment of so many
amiable, well-informed woman for the rest of her life; though perhaps it
Mr. Bingley and Jane remained at Netherfield only a twelvemonth. So near
a vicinity to her mother and Meryton relations was not desirable even to
sisters was then gratified; he bought an estate in a neighbouring county
to Derbyshire, and Jane and Elizabeth, in addition to every other source
of happiness, were within thirty miles of each other.
Kitty, to her very material advantage, spent the chief of her time with
temper as Lydia; and, removed from the influence of Lydia's example,
ignorant, and less insipid. From the further disadvantage of Lydia's
frequently invited her to come and stay with her, with the promise of
balls and young men, her father would never consent to her going.
Mary was the only daughter who remained at home; and she was necessarily
drawn from the pursuit of accomplishments by Mrs. Bennet's being quite
unable to sit alone. Mary was obliged to mix more with the world, but
it was suspected by her father that she submitted to the change without
As for Wickham and Lydia, their characters suffered no revolution from
the marriage of her sisters. He bore with philosophy the conviction that
do not speak to Mr. Darcy about it, if you had rather not.
As it happened that Elizabeth had _much_ rather not, she endeavoured in
her answer to put an end to every entreaty and expectation of the kind.
Such relief, however, as it was in her power to afford, by the practice
frequently sent them. It had always been evident to her that such an
income as theirs, under the direction of two persons so extravagant in
their wants, and heedless of the future, must be very insufficient to
their support; and whenever they changed their quarters, either Jane or
towards discharging their bills. Their manner of living, even when the
restoration of peace dismissed them to a home, was unsettled in the
situation, and always spending more than they ought. His affection for
in spite of her youth and her manners, she retained all the claims to
Elizabeth's sake, he assisted him further in his profession. Lydia was
occasionally a visitor there, when her husband was gone to enjoy himself
in London or Bath; and with the Bingleys they both of them frequently
proceeded so far as to talk of giving them a hint to be gone.
thought it advisable to retain the right of visiting at Pemberley, she
Pemberley was now Georgiana's home; and the attachment of the sisters
other even as well as they intended. Georgiana had the highest opinion
in the world of Elizabeth; though at first she often listened with
talking to her brother. He, who had always inspired in herself a respect
which almost overcame her affection, she now saw the object of open
a woman may take liberties with her husband which a brother will not
Lady Catherine was extremely indignant on the marriage of her nephew;
and as she gave way to all the genuine frankness of her character in
her reply to the letter which announced its arrangement, she sent him
he was prevailed on to overlook the offence, and seek a reconciliation;
and, after a little further resistance on the part of his aunt, her
resentment gave way, either to her affection for him, or her curiosity
on them at Pemberley, in spite of that pollution which its woods had
received, not merely from the presence of such a mistress, but the
visits of her uncle and aunt from the city.
With the Gardiners, they were always on the most intimate terms.
Darcy, as well as Elizabeth, really loved them; and they were both ever
sensible of the warmest gratitude towards the persons who, by bringing
her into Derbyshire, had been the means of uniting them.
End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Pride and Prejudice, by Jane Austen
Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation”
 or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.
1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
with the phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.
1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.”
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     of receipt of the work.
- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.
1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.
1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm
Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.
Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
status with the IRS.
The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.
Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
